@c SPDX-FileCopyrightText: The Bio++ Development Group
@c
@c SPDX-License-Identifier: CECILL-2.1

input texinfo                  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename bppsuite.info
@settitle BppSuite Manual 3.0.0
@documentencoding UTF-8
@afourpaper
@dircategory Science Biology Genetics
@direntry
* bppml: (bppml)                                     Bio++ Maximum Likelihood.
* bppseqgen: (bppseqgen)                             Bio++ Sequence Generator.
* bppancestor: (bppancestor)                         Bio++ Ancestral Sequences and Rates reconstruction.
* bppmixedlikelihoods: (bppmixedlikelihoods)         Bio++ Site-Likelihoods Inside Mixed Models.
* bppbranchlik: (bppbranchlik)                       Bio++ Likelihood on branches.
* bppdist: (bppdist)                                 Bio++ Distance Methods.
* bpppars: (bpppars)                                 Bio++ Maximum Parsimony.
* bppconsense: (bppconsense)                         Bio++ Consensus Trees.
* bppreroot: (bppreroot)                             Bio++ Serial Tree Re-rooting.
* bppseqman: (bppseqman)                             Bio++ Sequences Manipulation.
* bppalnscore: (bppalnscore)                         Bio++ Alignment Scoring.
* bpppopstats: (bpppopstats)                         Bio++ Population Genetics.
* bpptreedraw: (bpptreedraw)                         Bio++ Tree Drawing.
@end direntry
@c %**end of header

@copying
This is the manual of the Bio++ Program Suite, version 3.0.0.

Copyright @copyright{} 2007-2018 Bio++ development team
@end copying

@titlepage
@title BppSuite Manual
@author Julien Dutheil, Laurent Guéguen
@author @email{dutheil@@evolbio.mpg.de, laurent.gueguen@@univ-lyon1.fr}

@c The following two commands start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1fill1
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top The Bio++ Program Suite Manual

@insertcopying

@menu
* Introduction::                Introducing the Bio++ Program Suite and this manual.                
* Syntax::                      A general description of the syntax used to communicate with the programs.
* Common::                      Common options shared by several programs.                      
* Reference::                   The exhaustive list of options available for all programs in the Bio++ Program Suite.

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Common arguments encountered in several programs.

* Alphabet::                    Alphabets and genetic codes.
* Sequences::                   Loading sequences/alignments.
* Tree::                        Loading trees.
* AlphabetIndex::               Setting biochemical properties and distances. 
* Likelihoods::                 All modeling objects that lead to likelihood of phylogenies.
* Distribution::                Setting of the discrete distributions.
* Estimation::                  Estimating parameters by maximizing a likelihood function.
* WritingSequences::            Writing sequences/alignments to files. 
* WritingTrees::                Writing trees to files. 

Declaring Phylo-likelihoods

* Model::                       Substitution model specification
* Root::                        Root frequencies
* FrequenciesSet::              Frequencies 
* Rates::                       Rates across sites
* Process::                     Process along trees
* Scenarios::                   Scenarios of model mixing in process
* Phylo-likelihoods::           Declaration of phylogenetic likelihoods
* Linking::                     Linking parameters

Setting up the substitution models

* Nucleotide::                  Nucleotide models
* Protein::                     Protein models
* Miscellaneous::               Miscellaneous models
* Codon::                       Codon models
* Multiple::                    General multiple site models
* Meta::                        Meta models
* Mixture::                     Mixture of models
* Conditioned::                 Models conditioned by events

Bio++ Program Suite Reference

* bppml::                       Bio++ Maximum Likelihood.
* bppseqgen::                   Bio++ Sequence Generator.
* bppancestor::                 Bio++ Ancestral Sequences and Rates reconstruction.
* bppmixedlikelihoods::         Bio++ Site-Likelihoods Inside Mixed Models.
* bppbranchlik::                Bio++ Likelihood on branches.
* bppdist::                     Bio++ Distance Methods.
* bpppars::                     Bio++ Maximum Parsimony.
* bppconsense::                 Bio++ Consensus Trees.
* bppreroot::                   Bio++ Serial Tree Re-rooting.
* bppseqman::                   Bio++ Sequences Manipulation.
* bppalnscore::                 Bio++ Alignment Scoring.
* bpppopstats::                 Bio++ Population Genetics Statistics.
* bpptreedraw::                 Bio++ Tree Drawing.

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@end ifnottex
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Introduction, Syntax, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction

The Bio++ Program Suite is a package of programs using the Bio++
libraries and dedicated to Phylogenetics and Molecular Evolution.

All programs are independent, but can be combined to perform rather
complex analyses. These programs use the interface helper tools of the
libraries, and hence share the same syntax. They also have several
options in common, which may also be shared by third-party software.
This manual was hence split into three parts:
@table @emph
@item Bio++ option file syntax
A general description of the language used to interact with the programs.

@item Shared options
A more detailed description about several options that are encountered in several programs.
This includes input/output of data and model specifications.

@item The Bio++ Program Suite reference
Include a reference of all available options for each program in the package.

@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Syntax, Common, Introduction, Top
@chapter Syntax description

@section Calling the programs and writing the option files.

The programs in the Bio++ Program Suite are command line-driven.
Arguments may be passed as @command{parameter=value} options, either directly to the command line or
using an option file:
@cartouche
@example
program parameter1=value1 parameter2=value2 ... parameterN=valueN
@end example
@end cartouche
or

@cartouche
@example
program param=option_file
@end example

@end cartouche
where @{program@} is the name of the program to use (bppml, bppseqgen,
etc.). Option files contain @command{parameter=value} lines, with only
one parameter per line. They can be written from scratch using a
regular text editor, but since these files can potentially turn to be
quite complex, it is probably wiser to start with a sample provided
along with the program (if any!).

Extra-space may be included between parameter names, equal sign and value:
@cartouche
@example
first_parameter   = value1
second_parameter  = value2
@end example
@end cartouche
and lines can be broken using the backslash character:
@cartouche
@example
parameter = value1,\
            value2,\
            value3
@end example
@end cartouche

Comment may be included, in either scripting format:
@cartouche
@example
\# This is a comment
@end example
@end cartouche
C format:
@cartouche
@example
/* This is a comment
*/
@end example
@end cartouche
or C++ format:
@cartouche
@example
// This is a comment
@end example
@end cartouche
Command line and file options may be combined:
@cartouche
@example
@{program@} param=option_file parameterX=valueX
@end example
@end cartouche
In case @command{parameterX} is specified in both option file and
command line, the command line value will be used. This allows to run
the programs several times by changing a single option, like the name
of the data set for instance.

Option files can be nested, by using @command{param=nestedoptionfile}
within an option file, as with the command line. It is possible to use
this option as often as needed, this will load all the required option
files.

@section Different types of options

The next chapters describe the whole set of options available in BppSuite.
For each parameter, the type of parameter value expected is defined as:
@table @command
@item @{chars@}
A character chain

@item @{path@}
A file path, which may be absolute or related to the current directory

@item @{int@}
An integer

@item @{int@}, @{int>0@}, @{int>=0@}, @{int[2,10]@}
An integer, a positive integer, a positive non-null integer, an
integer falling between 2 and 10

@item @{real@}, @{real>0@}, etc
A real number, a positive real number, etc.

@item @{boolean@}
A Boolean value, which may be one of 'yes', 'no', 'true' or 'false'

@item @{xxx|yyy|zzz@}
A set of allowed values

@item @{list<type>@}
A list of values of specified type, separated by comas.

@end table

If an option availability or choice depends on another parameters, it will be noted as

@example
parameter1=@{xxx|yyy|zzz@}

parameter2=@{chars@} [[parameter1=zzz]]
@end example
meaning that parameter2 is available only if parameter1 is set to 'zzz'.

Any optional argument will be noted within hooks [].

In some cases, the argument value is more complexe and follows the 'keyval'
syntax.
@c This syntax will be quite familiar for users using languages like R, Python, or
@c certain LaTeX packages.
A keyval procedure is a name that does no contain any space, together with some
arguments within parentheses.
The arguments take the form @command{key=value}, separated by comas:
@cartouche
@example
parameter=Function(name1=value1, name2=value2)
@end example
@end cartouche
Space characters are allowed around the '=' and ',' ponctuations.

@section Variables

It is possible to recall anywhere the value of an option by using $(parameter).
@cartouche
@example
model1 = T92
output.tree.file = MyData_$(model1).dnd
@end example
@end cartouche
You can use this syntax to define global variables:
@cartouche
@example
data=MyData
input.data1 = alignment(file=$(data).fasta)
tree1 = user(file=$(data).dnd)
output.infos=$(data).infos
@end example
@end cartouche

Important note: it is not possible to use a macro with the 'param' option.
This is because all nested option files are parsed before the variable resolution.
Writing @command{param=\$(model1).bpp} will not work, but this allows the user to override variables in nested files, as with the command line.
For instance:
@cartouche
@example
#Option file 1:
param=options2.bpp
input.data1=alignment(file=\$(data).fasta, format=Fasta)
@end example
@end cartouche
@cartouche
@example
#Option file 2:
data=LSU
#etc
@end example
@end cartouche
 
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Common, Reference, Syntax, Top
@chapter Common arguments encountered in several programs.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* Alphabet::                    Alphabets and genetic codes.
* Sequences::                   Loading sequences/alignments.
* Tree::                        Loading trees.
* AlphabetIndex::               Setting biochemical properties and distances. 
* Likelihoods::                 All modeling objects that lead to likelihood of phylogenies.
* Distribution::                Setting of the discrete distributions.
* Estimation::                  Estimating parameters by maximizing a likelihood function.
* WritingSequences::            Writing sequences/alignments to files. 
* WritingTrees::                Writing trees to files. 
@end menu

@node Alphabet, Sequences, Common, Common
@section Setting alphabet and genetic code

@table @command
@item alphabet =
@{DNA|RNA|Protein|Binary|Lexicon(words=(list of words))|Word(letter=@{DNA|RNA|Protein@},length=@{int@})|\
Codon(letter=@{DNA|RNA@})|Allelic(base=@{alphabet@}, N=@{int@})@}
The alphabet to use when reading sequences. DNA and RNA alphabet can in addition take an argument:

@table @command
@item bangAsgap=@{bool@}
Tell is exclamation mark should be considered as a gap character. The default is to consider it as an unknown character such as 'N' or '?'.
@end table


The states of the alphabets are in alphabetical order. For the proteic
alphabet, the amino-acid are in the order of their 3-letters code
(ALA, ARG, ASN, ...).

For the allelic alphabet, the states are in order of the base
alphabet, first the plain states and then the polymorphic states. For
example:

@example
alphabet=Allelic(base=DNA,N=3)
@end example

has states:  A3_0, C3_0, G3_0, T3_0, A2C1, A1C2, A2G1, A1G2, A2T1, A1T2, C2G1, C1G2, C2T1, C1T2, G2T1, G1T2.
 

@table @command
@item Lexicon(words=(list of words))
builds an alphabet of any set of words, as long as they have the same
length. Gap (resp. unknown) word is then a word of "-" (resp. "?") of
the same length.
@end table

@end table

@sp 1

For codon alphabets, the genetic code has to be set, using the command

@table @command
@item genetic_code = @{translation table@}

where 'translation table' specifies the code to use, either as a text
description, or as the NCBI number. The following table give the
currently implemented codes with their corresponding names:

@multitable @columnfractions 0.5 0.5
@item Standard @tab 1
@item VertebrateMitochondrial @tab 2
@item YeastMitochondrial @tab 3
@item MoldMitochondrial @tab 4
@item InvertebrateMitochondrial @tab 5
@item CiliateNuclear @tab 6
@item EchinodermMitochondrial @tab 9
@item AscidianMitochondrial @tab 13
@end multitable

@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Sequences, Tree, Alphabet, Common
@section Reading sequences

Sequences are numbered as data like this:

@table @command

@item input.data@{int@} = alignment(@{alignment arguments@})
A description of the set of sequence analysed, using the keyval syntax.

A sequence should be in the same alphabet as the one defined. In case
of Allelic alphabet, the format can define the allelic states
explicitly (as in Pasta format), or in the base alphabet. In this
latter case, the value assigned in each allelic state is the
likelihood of the observed data (as if it was sampled from the allelic
distribution described in the state).
@end table

The available arguments are : 
@table @command
@item file=@{path@}
The sequence file to use. Depending on the program, these sequences
have or do not have to be aligned.

@item format = @{sequence format description@}
The sequence file format.

@item keep_names = all(default) | @{list of sequence names@}
Provide an optional list of sequences to keep. Sequences whose name is not in the list will be discarded.
Names in the list with no match in the sequence file will be ignored.

@item remove_names = none(default) | @{list of sequence names@}
Provide an optional list of sequences to be discarded.
Names in the list with no match in the sequence file will raise an error.
This option can be combined with the previous one.

@item selection = @{list of integers@}
Will only consider sites in the given list of positions, in extended
format : positions separated with ",", and "i:j" for all positions
between i and j, included.

@item selection = @{Sample(n=@{integer@} [, replace=@{true@}])@}
Will consider @{n@} random sites, with optional replacement.

@end table

@table @command

@item Fasta(extended=@{bool@}, strictNames=@{bool@})
The fasta format.
The argument @command{extended}, default to 'no', allows to enable the
HUPO-PSI extension of the format.
The argument @command{strict_names}, default to 'no', specifies that
only the first word in the fasta header is used as a sequence names,
the rest of the header being considered as comments.

@item Mase(siteSelection=@{chars@})
The Mase format (as read by Seaview and Phylo_win for instance), with
an optional site selection name.

@item Phylip(order=@{interleaved|sequential@}, type=@{classic|extended@}, split=@{spaces|tab@})                          

The Phylip format, with several variations. The argument
@command{order} distinguishes between sequential and interleaved
format, while the option @command{type} distinguished between the
plain old Phylip format and the more recent extension allowing for
sequence names longer than 10 characters, as understood by PAML and
PhyML. Finally, the @command{split} argument specifies the type of
character that separates the sequence name from the sequence content.
The conventional option is to use one (classic) or more (extended)
spaces, but tabs can also be used instead.

@item Clustal(extraSpaces=@{int@})
The Clustal format. 
In its basic set up, sequence names do not have space characters, and
one space splits the sequence content from its name. The parser can
however be configured to allow for spaces in the sequence names,
providing a minimum number of space characters is used to split the
content from the name. Setting @command{extraSpaces} to 5 for
instance, the sequences are expected to be at least 6 spaces away for
their names.

@item Dcse()
The DCSE alignment format. The secondary structure annotation will be
ignored.

@item Nexus()
The Nexus alignment format. Only very basic support is provided.

@end table

For programs that do not require the sequences to be aligned, the
following formats are also available:
@table @command

@item GenBank()
Very basic support: only retrieves the sequence content for now, all
features are ignored.

@end table

Basic operations can be performed on the sequences:

@table @command

@item sites_to_use = @{all|nogap|complete@}
This option only works if the program requires an alignment.
Tells which sites to use (default: 'complete').
The @option{nogap} option removes all sites containing at least one
gap, and the @option{complete} option removes all sites containing at
least one gap or one generic character, as 'X' for instance.

@item remove_stop_codons = @{boolean@}
This option only works if the alphabet is a codon alphabet. Removes
the sites where there is a stop codon (default: 'yes').

@item max_gap_allowed=@{percentage|number@}
This option only works if the program requires an alignment. Only
works when the @option{all} option is selected. It specifies the
maximum amount of gap allowed per site, as a number of sequence or a
percentage (detected if symbol @{\%@} is used). Sites not matching the
criterion will not be included in the analysis, but the original site
numbering will be used in the output files (if relevant).

@item max_unresolved_allowed=@{percentage|number@}
This option only works if the program requires an alignment. Only
works when the @option{all} option is selected. It specifies the
maximum amount of unresolved states per site, as a number of sequence
or a percentage. Sites not matching the criterion will not be included
in the analysis, but the original site numbering will be used in the
output files (if relevant).

@end table
 
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Tree, AlphabetIndex, Sequences, Common
@section Reading trees

Trees are numbered like this:

@table @command

@item input.tree@{int@} = @{user|random@}(@{tree arguments@})
A description of the tree used, using the keyval syntax.

@end table

A tree can be declared as given by the user from a file, or to be
random from an alignment number.

If the tree is given by the user, the arguments are :

@table @command
@item file = @{path@}
The phylogenetic tree file to use.

@item format = @{Newick|Nexus|NHX@}
The format of the input tree file.

@end table

If the tree is random, the arguments are :

@table @command
@item data = @{int@}
The number of the data from which the leaf names will used.

@end table

Some programs may require that your file contains several trees. In
this case the syntax is 

@table @command
@item input.tree = user(file = @{path@}[,@{other options@}])
The file containing multiple trees.
@end table

Options:

@table @command
@item data = @{int@}
The number of the data on which the tree will be fit by pruning.

@end table


The branch lengths can be aliased to other parameters (such as to
other branch lengths) as in the example:

@example
input.tree1 = user(file = ftree1.dnd, BrLen0=BrLen1, BrLen2=BrLen3_2)
input.tree2 = user(file = ftree2.dnd)
@end example

which means that the branch 0 of tree 1 is aliased to the branch 1 of
tree 1, and branch 2 of tree 1 is aliased to branch 3 of tree 2.


In case the input tree does not specify node identifiers, some will be
generated automatically. Nodes identifiers can be outputted using the
following option:

@table @command
@item output.tree_ids.file = @{@{path@}|none@}
A tree file in newick format, with node ids instead of bootstrap
values, and leaf names with their id as suffix.
@end table

In case it is supported by the program (only bppml), the use of that
option will cause the program to exit just after producing the tagged
tree.


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node AlphabetIndex, Likelihoods, Tree, Common
@section Specifying biochemical properties and distances

Some methods require an "alphabet index" to be specified. Alphabet
indexes associate a value with each alphabet state (Index1, e.g. a
biochemical property) or for a pair of states (Index2, e.g. a
biochemical distance). This section describes the supported indexes:

@subsection Index1

@table @command
@item None
If no index should be used.
@item Surface, Mass, Volume, Charge @{AA@}
Basic amino acids properties.
@item GranthamPolarity, GranthamVolume @{AA@}
Grantham's polarity and volume index.
@item KleinCharge @{AA@}
Klein's charge.
@item ChouFasmanAHelix, ChouFasmanBSheet, ChouFasmanTurn @{AA@}
Chou and Fasmani score for secondary structure prediction. 
@item ChenGuHuangHydrophobicity @{AA@}
Hydrophobicity according to Chen, Gu and Huang.
@item SEALow, SEAMedium, SEAHigh @{AA@}
Solvent Exposed Area, percent of amino acids having a SEA below 10,
between 10 and 30, or higher than 30, respectively.
@item User
A user defined Index1, from a file in the AAIndex1 syntax. The input
file is specified using the @command{file=@{path@}} argument.
@command{file}

@end table


@subsection Index2

@table @command
@item None
If no index should be used.
@item Blosum50 @{AA@}
The BLOSUM 50 amino acid distance matrix.
@item Grantham, Miyata @{AA@}
Two biochemical distance matrices. Both accept an optional argument
@command{symmetrical=@{boolean@}} allowing to specify if the matrix
should be symmetric or not. If not, the distance measure will be
signed.
@item Diff
Allow to compute a distance matrix by taking the difference for, each
pair of state, of an Index1 value. The Index1 to use is specified
using the @command{index1=@{Index1 description@}} argument. An
additional argument allow to specify whether the resulting matrix
should be symmetric (@command{symmetrical=@{boolean@}}): if so, the
absolute difference will be used. Alternatively, the distance will be
signed and d[i,j] = - d[j,i].
@item User
A user defined Index2, from a file in the AAIndex2 syntax. The input
file is specified using the @command{file=@{path@}} argument. The
@command{symmetrical=@{boolean@}} argument can be used to specify
whether distances should be signed or not.
@end table


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------


@node Likelihoods, Estimation, AlphabetIndex, Common
@section Declaring Phylo-likelihoods

@menu
* Model::                       Substitution model specification
* Root::                        Root frequencies
* FrequenciesSet::              Frequencies 
* Rates::                       Rates across sites
* Process::                     Process along trees
* Scenarios::                   Scenarios of model mixing in process
* Phylo-likelihoods::           Declaration of phylogenetic likelihoods
* Linking::                     Linking parameters
@end menu

@node Model, Root, Likelihoods, Likelihoods
@subsection Setting up the substitution models

@menu
* Nucleotide::                  Nucleotide models
* Protein::                     Protein models
* Miscellaneous::               Miscellaneous models
* Codon::                       Codon models
* Multiple::                    General multiple site models
* Meta::                        Meta models
* Mixture::                     Mixture of models
* Conditioned::                 Models conditioned by events
* Register::
@end menu

@table @command

@item model@{int@} = @{model description@}
A description of a substitution model of a given number use, using the
keyval syntax.

@end table

Many models have an optional parameter @var{initFreqs} to initialize
the parameters of the model related with equilibrium frequencies:

@table @command

@item initFreqs=values(@{list<real]0,1[>@})
The equilibrium frequency is set equal (as much as possible) to the
given frequencies. Those frequencies are given in the same order as
the alphabet, and they must sum 1.

@item initFreqs=observed, data=@{int@} [, initFreqs.observedPseudoCount=@{integer@}]

The equilibrium frequency is set equal (as much as possible) to the
observed frequencies in the data with given number.

With option @var{initFreqs.observedPseudoCount} a pseudocount is added
to all counts of letters (or words), when the frequencies are computed
from observed data.

@end table

@node Nucleotide, Protein, Model, Model
@subsubsection Nucleotide models

Here is the list of available basic substitution models on nucleotide
alphabets:

@table @command

@item @anchor{model nucleotide JCnuc}
@item  JC69
The Jukes and Cantor model. This model has no additional parameter.
See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1JCnuc.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model nucleotide K80}
@item  K80([kappa=@{real>0@}])
The Kimura 2 parameters model. @var{kappa} is the transition over
transversion ratio. Default: @var{kappa}=1. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1K80.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model nucleotide F84}
@item  F84([kappa=@{real>0@}, theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@},theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, initFreqs] )
Felsenstein's 1984 substitution model, with transition/transversion
ratio @var{kappa} and 4 distinct equilibrium frequencies, set with three
independent parameters: @var{theta} is the GC content, @var{theta1} is
the proportion of G / (G + C) and @var{theta2} is the proportion of A
/ (A + T or U). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1F84.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model nucleotide HKY85}
@item HKY85([kappa=@{real>0@}, theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, initFreqs])
Hasegawa, Kishino and Yano 1985's substitution model. The model is
similar to @command{F84}, but with a different implementation. The
@var{kappa} parameter used here is comparable to the one in
@command{K80}. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1HKY85.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model nucleotide T92}
@item T92([kappa=@{real>0@}, theta=@{real]0,1[@}, initFreqs])
Tamura 1992's model for nucleotides, similar to @command{HKY85}, yet
assuming that the equilibrium frequencies of A = T/U and G = C. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1T92.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model nucleotide TN93}
@item TN93([kappa1=@{real>0@}, kappa2=@{real>0@}, theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, initFreqs])
Tamura and Nei 1993's model, similar to @command{HKY85}, but allowing
for two distinct transition/transversion ratios. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1TN93.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model nucleotide GTR}
@item  GTR([a=@{real>0@}, b=@{real>0@}, c=@{real>0@}, d=@{real>0@}, e=@{real>0@}, theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@} ,initFreqs])
The General Time-Reversible substitution model. Parameters @var{a},
@var{b}, @var{c}, @var{d}, @var{e} are the entries of the
exchangeability matrix. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1GTR.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model nucleotide L95}
@item  L95([beta=@{real>0@}, gamma=@{real>0@}, delta=@{real>0@}, theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, initFreqs])
The strand-symmetric model of Lobry 1995, for nucleotides. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1L95.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model nucleotide SSR}
@item  SSR([beta=@{real>0@}, gamma=@{real>0@}, delta=@{real>0@}, theta=@{real]0,1[@}])
The strand-symmetric reversible model, for nucleotides. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1SSR.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model nucleotide RN95}
@item  RN95([thetaR=@{real]0,1[@}, thetaC=@{real]0,1[@}, thetaG=@{real]0,1[@}, kappaP=@{real[0,1[@}, gammaP=@{real[0,1[@}, sigmaP=@{real>1@}, alphaP=@{real>1@}])
The model described by Rhetsky and Nei, where the only hypothesis is
that the transversion rates are only dependent of the target
nucleotide. This model is not reversible. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1RN95.html#details,Bio++
description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model nucleotide RN95s}
@item  RN95s([thetaA=@{real]0,0.5[@}, gamma=@{real]0,0.5[@}, alphaP=@{real>1@}]) 
The instersection of models RN95 and L95. The two hypotheses are that
the transversion rates are only dependent of the target nucleotide,
and strand symmetry. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1RN95s.html#details,Bio++
description, Bio++ description}.

@end table

@node Protein, Miscellaneous, Nucleotide, Model
@subsubsection Protein models

Here is the list of available basic substitution models on protein
alphabets:

@table @command

@item @anchor{model protein JCprot}
@item  JC69
The Jukes and Cantor model. This model has no additional parameter. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1JCprot.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein DSO78}
@item  DSO78
Protein substitution model, using the dcmutt implementation of Kosiol
and Goldman 2005. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1DSO78.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein JTT92}
@item  JTT92
Protein substitution model, using the dcmutt implementation of Kosiol
and Goldman 2005. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1JTT92.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein WAG01}
@item  WAG01
Protein substitution model, from Whelan & Goldman 2001. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1WAG01.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein LG08}
@item  LG08
Protein substitution model, from Le & Gascuel 2008. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1LG08.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein LLG08_EX2}
@item  LLG08_EX2([relrate1=@{real]0,1[@}, relproba1=@{real]0,1[@}])
Protein substitution model, from Le, Lartillot & Gascuel 2008.
@xref{Mixture}, for the meaning of the variables. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1LLG08__EX2.html#details,
Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein LLG08_EX3}
@item  LLG08_EX3([relrate1=@{real]0,1[@}, relrate2=@{real]0,1[@}, relproba1=@{real]0,1[@}, relproba2=@{real]0,1[@}])
Protein substitution model, from Le, Lartillot & Gascuel 2008. @xref{Mixture}, for the meaning of the variables. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1LLG08__EX3.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein LLG08_EHO}
@item  LLG08_EHO([relrate1=@{real]0,1[@}, relrate2=@{real]0,1[@}, relproba1=@{real]0,1[@}, relproba2=@{real]0,1[@}])
Protein substitution model, from Le, Lartillot & Gascuel 2008. @xref{Mixture}, for the meaning of the variables. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1LLG08__EHO.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein LLG08_UL2}
@item  LLG08_UL2([relrate1=@{real]0,1[@}, relproba1=@{real]0,1[@}])
Protein substitution model, from Le, Lartillot & Gascuel 2008. @xref{Mixture}, for the meaning of the variables. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1LLG08__UL2.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein LLG08_UL3}
@item  LLG08_UL3([relrate1=@{real]0,1[@}, relrate2=@{real]0,1[@}, relproba1=@{real]0,1[@}, relproba2=@{real]0,1[@}])
Protein substitution model, from Le, Lartillot & Gascuel 2008. @xref{Mixture}, for the meaning of the variables. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1LLG08__UL3.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model protein LGL08_CAT}
@item  LGL08_CAT(nbCat=@{[10,20,30,40,50,60]@}, [relrate1=@{real]0,1[@}, relrate2=@{real]0,1[@}, ..., relproba1=@{real]0,1[@}, relproba2=@{real]0,1[@}, ...] ))
CAT protein substitution model, from Le, Gascuel & Lartillot 2008, with a
given number (@var{nbCat}) of profiles. @xref{Mixture}, for the meaning
of the variables. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1LGL08__CAT.html#details,
Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model protein LGL08_CAT_C}
@item  LGL08_CAT_C@{[1|...|nbCat]@}(nbCat=@{[10|20|30|40|50|60]@})
Submodel of a given CAT Protein substitution model, from Le, Gascuel &
Lartillot 2008, with a given number (@var{nbCat}) of profiles. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1LGL08__CAT.html#details,
Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model protein Coala}
@item Coala(exch=@{model name@}, nbrAxes=@{integer@} ,data=@{integer@})
Coala model, where amino acid equilibrium frequencies are
parameterized through coordinates on main COA axes, computed from the
data. From Groussin, Boussau, Gouy 2015. @var{exch} describes the
exchangeability matrix from an available protein model, @var{nbrAxes}
sets the numbre of axes used in the COA, and @var{data} refers to the
number of the data used for the COA.

@item @anchor{model protein DSO78+F}
@item  DSO78+F([theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, ..., initFreqs])
Protein substitution model, using the dcmutt implementation of Kosiol
and Goldman 2005 and free equilibrium frequencies. The @var{thetaX}
are frequencies parameters, where X is 1 to 19. Parameter @var{theta1}
is the proportion of A, @var{theta2} is the proportion of R over
(1-A), @var{theta3} the proportion of N over (1-A-R), etc. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1DSO78.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein JTT92+F}
@item  JTT92+F([theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, ..., initFreqs])
Protein substitution model, using the dcmutt implementation of Kosiol
and Goldman 2005 and free equilibrium frequencies. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1JTT92.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein WAG01+F}
@item  WAG01+F([theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, ..., initFreqs])
Protein substitution model, from Whelan & Goldman 2001, and free
equilibrium frequencies. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1WAG01.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein LG08+F}
@item  LG08+F([theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, ..., initFreqs])
Protein substitution model, from Le & Gascuel 2008, and free
equilibrium frequencies. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1LG08.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model protein Empirical}
@item  Empirical(name=@{chars@}, file=@{path@})
Build a protein substitution model from a file in PAML format, and use
'name' as a namespace for parameters.

@item @anchor{model protein Empirical+F}
@item  Empirical+F(name=@{chars@}, file=@{path@}, [theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, ..., initFreqs])
Build a protein substitution model from a file in PAML format, and use
free equilibrium frequencies. 'name' will be used as a parameter
namespace, including for frequencies.

@end table

@node Miscellaneous, Codon, Protein, Model
@subsubsection Miscellaneous models

Here is the list of available basic substitution models on codon
alphabets:

@table @command
@item @anchor{model misc Binary}
@item  Binary([kappa=@{real>0@}, initFreqs])
Build the model on binary alphabet, where @var{kappa} is the relative
proportion of 1 over 0 in the equilibrium distribution. Default:
@var{kappa}=1. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1BinarySubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@end table

@table @command
@item @anchor{model misc Equi}
@item  Equi([initFreqs])
Build the equiprobable model, between any set of states. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1EquiprobableSubstitutionModel.html, Bio++ description}.

@end table

@node Codon, Multiple, Miscellaneous, Model
@subsubsection Codon models

Some codon models take as argument a @var{frequencies} option
specifying the equilibrium frequencies of the model: @xref{Codon frequencies}.

The same words can be used to specify root frequencies for codon
models, in the case of non stationarity.

@sp 1

@table @command

@item @anchor{model codon GY94}
@item  GY94([kappa=@{real>0@}, V=@{real>0@}, initFreqs])
Goldman and Yang (1994) substitution model for codons (default values:
@var{kappa}=1 and @var{V}=10000). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1GY94.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model codon MG94}
@item  MG94([rho=@{real>0@}, initFreqs])
Muse and Gaut (1994) substitution model for codons (default values:
@var{rho}=1). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1MG94.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model codon YN98}
@item  YN98([kappa=@{real>0@}, omega=@{real>0@}, initFreqs])
Yang and Nielsen (1998) substitution model for codons (default values:
@var{kappa}=1 and @var{omega}=1). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YN98.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model codon YNGP_M0}
@item  YNGP_M0([kappa=@{real>0@}, omega=@{real>0@}, initFreqs])
The M0 model of PAML, ie the same as YN98. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YN98.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model codon YNGP_M1}
@item   YNGP_M1([kappa=@{real>0@}, omega=@{real>0@}, p0=@{real>0 and <1 @}, initFreqs])
The M1a model of PAML, see Yang, Z., R. Nielsen, N. Goldman, and A.-M.
K. Pedersen (2000) (default values: @var{kappa}=1, @var{p0}=0.5,
@var{omega}=0.5). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YNGP__M1.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model codon YNGP_M2}
@item   YNGP_M2([kappa=@{real>0@}, omega0=@{real>0 and <1@}, theta1=@{real>0 and <1 @}],  omega1=@{real>1@},  theta2=@{real>0 and <1 @}, initFreqs])

The M2a model of PAML, see Yang, Z., R. Nielsen, N. Goldman, and A.-M.
K. Pedersen (2000), with  p0=theta1  and
p1=(1-theta1)*theta2 (default values: @var{kappa}=1, @var{theta1}=0.33333,
@var{theta2}=0.5, @var{omega0}=0.5, @var{omega2}=0.5). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YNGP__M2.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.
  

@item  @anchor{model codon YNGP_M3}
@item  YNGP_M3([n=@{integer>0@}, kappa=@{real>0@}, omega0=@{real>0 and <1@}, delta1=@{real>0@}, ..., delta@var{n-1}=@{real>0@}, theta1=@{real>0 and <1 @}, ..., theta@var{n-1}1=@{real>0 and <1 @}, initFreqs])

The M3 model of PAML, see Yang, Z., R. Nielsen, N. Goldman, and A.-M.
K. Pedersen (2000), with @var{n} discrete values, with p0=theta1
and pk=(1-theta1)*...*(1-thetak)*theta(k+1), and
omegak=omega0+delta1+....+deltak (default values: @var{n}=3,
@var{kappa}=1, @var{thetak}=1/(n-k+1), @var{omega0}=0.5,
@var{deltak}=0.5). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YNGP__M3.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item  @anchor{model codon YNGP_M7}
@item  YNGP_M7(n=@{integer>0@}, kappa=@{real>0@}, p=@{real>1@}, q=@{real>1 @}, initFreqs])

The M7 model of PAML, see Yang, Z., R. Nielsen, N. Goldman, and A.-M.
K. Pedersen (2000), with the Beta distribution discretized in @var{n}
classes (default values: @var{kappa}=1, @var{p}=2, @var{q}=2). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YNGP__M7.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item  @anchor{model codon YNGP_M8}
@item  YNGP_M8(n=@{integer>0@}, [kappa=@{real>0@}, omegas=@{real>1@}, p0=@{real>0@},p=@{real>1@}, q=@{real>1 @}, initFreqs])

The M8 model of PAML, see Yang, Z., R. Nielsen, N. Goldman, and A.-M.
K. Pedersen (2000), with the Beta distribution discretized in @var{n}
classes (default values: @var{kappa}=1, @var{p}=2, @var{q}=2,
@var{p0}=0.5, @var{omegas}=2). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YNGP__M8.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item  @anchor{model codon YNGP_M8a}
@item  YNGP_M8a(n=@{integer>0@}, [kappa=@{real>0@}, p0=@{real>0@},p=@{real>1@}, q=@{real>1 @}, initFreqs])

The M8a model of PAML, see Yang, Z., R. Nielsen, N. Goldman, and A.-M.
K. Pedersen (2000), with the Beta distribution discretized in @var{n}
classes (default values: @var{kappa}=1, @var{p}=2, @var{q}=2,
@var{p0}=0.5). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YNGP__M8a.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item  @anchor{model codon YNGP_M9}
@item  YNGP_M9(nbeta=@{integer>0@}, ngamma=@{integer>0@}, [kappa=@{real>0@}, initFreqs])

The M9 model of PAML, see Yang, Z., R. Nielsen, N. Goldman, and A.-M.
K. Pedersen (2000), with the Beta distribution discretized in @var{nbeta}
classes and Gamma distribution in @var{ngamma} classes. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YNGP__M9.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item  @anchor{model codon YNGP_M10}
@item  YNGP_M10(n=@{integer>0@}, [kappa=@{real>0@}, p0=@{real>0@},p=@{real>1@}, q=@{real>1 @}, initFreqs])

The M10 model of PAML, see Yang, Z., R. Nielsen, N. Goldman, and A.-M.
K. Pedersen (2000), with the Beta distribution discretized in @var{nbeta}
classes and Gamma distribution in @var{ngamma} classes and @var{omega=1}. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YNGP__M10.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@end table

It is also possible to setup more specific models, by specifying a
nucleotide model for each position. Model parameters names then take
the form of <codon model name>.<position set>_<position model
name>.<position specific parameter name>.

In the following models, the arguments @var{model} and
@var{model@{i@}} are for descriptions of models on bases.

@itemize
@item If the argument is @var{model}, the @emph{same} single site model is
used on all positions (ie the parameters are shared between all
positions).
@item If the arguments are @var{model1}, @var{model2}, @var{model3}, each
single site model stands for a single-site substitution model. In that
case, all single site models parameters are position dependent.
@end itemize

Each single site model is normalized and the substitution rates
between codons that differ on more than one letter are null.

The generator is first computed with these models and parameters on
the whole triplet alphabet, and then the substitution rates to and
from stop codons are set to zero and the generator is normalized with
this modification.

The model names are defined through several words that can be mixed
together to build models at hand. Some words are exclusive. The
model description must begin with @var{Codon}.

The options are:
@itemize
@item @var{Rate} words have specific rates
@item @var{Prot} use proteic models 
@item @var{AAClust} clustered sets of amino-acids and specific intra and
inter substitution rates
@item @var{Dist} non-synonymous vs synonymous substitution rates.

@end itemize

One of them be must used (default: @var{Rate}).

Additional options are possible:

@itemize
@item @var{CpG} intra codon specific CpG hypermutation rates
@item @var{AAFit} inter AA fitness based selection
@item @var{Fit} codon specific fitness -like frequencies based selection
@item @var{PhasFreq} equilibrium frequencies on letters inside codons
@item @var{Freq} equilibrium frequencies on codons
@end itemize

@sp 2

@table @command
@item @anchor{model codon Rate}
@item  Rate(model... [, relrate1=@{real>0@}, relrate2=@{real>0@}]) 

build substitution model on codons with position specific evolution
rates.

Arguments @var{relrate@{i@}} stands for the relative substitution rates
of the sites. Default: @var{relrate@{i@}=1/@{4-i@}}, such that the rate
of each site is 1/3.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Codon(letter=DNA)
genetic_code=Standard
model1=CodonRate(model=T92)
@end example
@end cartouche

builds a model on codons, such all sites follow the same T92 model.
The parameters names are @var{CodonRate.123_T92.kappa},
@var{CodonRate.relrate1}, @var{CodonRate.relrate2}.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Codon(letter=DNA)
genetic_code=Standard
mode1=CodonRate(model1=T92, model2=T92, model3=JC69)
@end example
@end cartouche

builds a model on codons, such that first and second sites follow
independent T92 models, and third site follows a JC69 model. Then the
parameters names are @var{CodonRate.1_T92.kappa},
@var{CodonRate.2_T92.kappa}, @var{CodonRate.relrate1},
@var{CodonRate.relrate2}, and can be initialized as:

@cartouche
@example
model1=CodonRate(model1=T92(theta=0.5, kappa=2), \
                model2=T92(theta=0.4, kappa=2), model3=JC69)
@end example
@end cartouche

See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1CodonRateSubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item Dist(model...[, beta=@{real>0@}])

Substitution model on codons that takes into account the difference
between synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions.

Optional argument @var{beta} is the ratio between non-synonymous
substitution rate and synonymous substitution rate. Default value: 1.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Codon(letter=DNA)
model1=CodonDist(model=T92)
@end example
@end cartouche

builds a model on codons, such all sites follow the same T92 model.
The parameters names are @var{CodonDist.123_T92.kappa} and 
@var{CodonDist.beta}.

@cartouche 
@example
alphabet=Codon(letter=DNA, type=Standard)
model=CodonDist(model1=T92, model2=T92, model3=JC69)
@end example
@end cartouche

builds a model on codons, such that first and second sites follow
independent T92 models, and third site follows a JC69 model. Then the
parameters names are @var{CodonDist.1_T92.kappa},
@var{CodonDist.2_T92.kappa}, @var{CodonDist.beta}.

See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1CodonDistanceSubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item Prot(model..., protmodel=@{proteic model name@}[, beta=@{real>0@}])

Substitution model on codons that takes into account the substitution
rates in a protein model. Those rates are multiplied by a
non-synonymous susbtitution factor, aka @var{beta}.

@var{Prot} and @var{Dist} words are exclusive.


Optional argument @var{beta} is the ratio between average substitution
rate between amino-acids and synonymous substitution rate. Default
value: 1.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Codon(letter=DNA)
genetic_code=Standard
model1=CodonProt(model=T92, protmodel=LG08)
@end example
@end cartouche

builds a model on codons, such all sites follow the same T92 model,
and amino-acid rates are proportional to LG08 substitution matrice.
The parameters names are @var{CodonProt.123_T92.kappa} and 
@var{CodonProt.beta}.

@end table

Optional words to describe the use of equilibrium frequencies
sets. This word should be used with nucleotidic models which
equilibrium distribution is fixed, and does not depend on parameters.
Otherwise there may be problems of identifiability of the parameters.

@table @command

@item @anchor{CodonDistFreq}
@item Freq(frequencies=@{frequencies set description@})

Substitution rates are multiplied by the frequency of the target codon
in the given frequencies set. This factor is described by the
@var{frequencies} argument. @xref{Codon frequencies}.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Codon(letter=DNA)
genetic_code=Standard
model1=CodonDistFreq(frequencies=Full())
@end example
@end cartouche

has parameters @var{CodonDistFreq.012_T92.kappa},
@var{CodonDistFreq.Full.theta1}, ...,
@var{CodonDistFreq.Full.theta60},
@var{CodonDistFreq.beta}.

See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1CodonDistanceFrequenciesSubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item PhasFreq(frequencies=@{frequencies set description@})

The substitution rates are multiplied by the product of the frequencies
of the changed nucleotides -- conditioned on the phase -- in the given
frequencies set. This factor is described by the @var{frequencies}
argument. @xref{Codon frequencies}.


For example, see the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1CodonDistancePhaseFrequenciesSubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@end table



In addition some models are defined that allow multiple substitutions,
with similar logic of included words. These models are prefixed by @var{Kron}.


@table @command

@item @anchor{model codon KronDistFreq}
@item KronDistFreq(model=@{model name@} [,positions=pos1*pos2*...*posn + posx*...*posm + ...)])

@item KronDistFreq(model1=@{model name@}, model1=@{model name@}, ..., modeln=@{model name@}[,positions=pos1*pos2*...*posn + posx*...*posm + ...])

substitution model on codons as @xref{CodonDistFreq} above, allowing
simultaneous substitutions.

Optional argument @var{positions} can be used to describe which
substitutions are allowed. See the @xref{model word Kron} modeling and the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1KroneckerCodonDistanceFrequenciesSubstitutionModel.html,
Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model codon KronDist}
@item KronDist(model=@{model name@} [,positions=pos1*pos2*...*posn + posx*...*posm + ...)])

@item KronDist(model1=@{model name@}, model1=@{model name@}, ..., modeln=@{model name@}[,positions=pos1*pos2*...*posn + posx*...*posm + ...])

substitution model on codons as @var{CodonDist} above, allowing
simultaneous substitutions.

Optional argument @var{positions} can be used to describe which
substitutions are allowed. See the @xref{model word Kron} modeling and the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1KroneckerCodonDistanceSubstitutionModel.html,
Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model codon KCM}
@item KCM7() and  KCM19() 

Kronecker Codon Model based on a unique (KCM7) or one per position
(KCM19) GTR model. From Zaheri & al, MBE, 2014.

See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1KCM.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.



@end table


@node Multiple, Meta, Codon, Model
@subsubsection General multiple site models

@table @command

@item @anchor{model word Word}
@item Word(model=@{model name@} [,relrate1=@{1>real>0@}, ..., relrate@{n-1@}=@{1>real>0@}]) 
or 
@item Word(model1=@{model name@}, model1=@{model name@}, ..., modeln=@{model name@}[, relrate1=@{1> real>0@}, ..., relrate@{n-1@}=@{1> real>0@}])

substitution model on words. The arguments @var{model} and
@var{model@{i@}} are for descriptions of models on single sites such
as nucleotides or amino acids. The alphabet must be a Word alphabet.

If the argument is @var{model}, the length of the words in the
substitution model is determined by the length of the words in the
alphabet, and the @emph{same} single site model is used (ie the
parameters are shared between all positions).

If the arguments are @var{model1}, ..., @var{model@{n@}}, the length
of the words in the alphabet must be @var{n}, and each single site
model stands for a single-site substitution model. In that case, all
single site models parameters are position dependent.

Each single site model is normalized and the substitution rates
between words that differ on more than one letter are null.

Arguments @var{relrate@{i@}} stands for the relative substitution rates
of the sites. Default: @var{relrate@{i@}=1/@{n-i+1@}}, such that the rate
of each site is 1/n.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Word(letter=DNA,length=4)
model1=Word(model=T92())
@end example
@end cartouche

builds a model on 4 bases words, such all sites follow the same T92
model. The parameters names are @var{Word.1234_T92.kappa},
@var{Word.relrate1}, @var{Word.relrate2}, @var{Word.relrate3}.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Word(letter=DNA,length=4)
model1=Word(model1=T92(), model2=T92(), model3=JC69(), \
           model4=HKY85())
@end example
@end cartouche

builds a model on 4 bases words, such first and second sites follow
independent T92 models, third site follows a JC69 model, and fourth
site follows a HKY85 model. Then the parameters names are
@var{Word.1_T92.kappa}, @var{Word.2_T92.kappa},
@var{Word.4_HKY85.kappa}, @var{Word.4_HKY85.theta},
@var{Word.4_HKY85.theta1}, @var{Word.4_HKY85.theta2},
@var{Word.relrate1}, @var{Word.relrate2}, @var{Word.relrate3}.

See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1WordSubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model word Kron}
@item Kron(model=@{model name@} [,positions=pos1*pos2*...*posn + posx*...*posm + ...)])

@item Kron(model1=@{model name@}, model1=@{model name@}, ..., modeln=@{model name@}[,positions=pos1*pos2*...*posn + posx*...*posm + ...])

substitution model on words, allowing simultaneous substitutions. The
arguments @var{model} and @var{model@{i@}} are for descriptions of
models on single sites such as nucleotides or amino acids. The
alphabet must be a Word alphabet.

If the argument is @var{model}, the length of the words in the
substitution model is determined by the length of the words in the
alphabet, and the @emph{same} single site model is used (ie the
parameters are shared between all positions).

If the arguments are @var{model1}, ..., @var{model@{n@}}, the length
of the words in the alphabet must be @var{n}, and each single site
model stands for a single-site substitution model. In that case, all
single site models parameters are position dependent.

The rate of a multiple substitution is the product of the rates of the
single substitutions it is made of.

Without optional argument @var{positions}, all single and multiple
substitutions are allowed.

Optional argument @var{positions} describes the allowed substitutions.
It is written as a formula with positions between 1 and the length of
the word, and symbols '*' (to link positions that must change
together) and '+' (to link sets of multiple susbtitutions that are
allowed).

As examples, on a DNA word with 3 positions:

@cartouche
@example
model1=Kron(model=K80(), positions=1*2*3)
@end example
@end cartouche
allows only substitutions that change all the 3 positions.

@cartouche
@example
model1=Kron(model=K80(), positions=1*2+3)
@end example
@end cartouche
allows only substitutions that change the positions 1 and 2, and the
ones that change position 3 alone.

@cartouche
@example
model1=Kron1(model=K80(), positions=1*2+2*3)
@end example
@end cartouche
allows only substitutions that change two neighbor positions.

@cartouche
@example
model1=Kron(model=K80(), positions=1+2+3)
@end example
@end cartouche
allows only substitutions that change one position, i.e. @var{Word}
model.


See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1KronSubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model word Triplet}
@item  Triplet(model=@{model description@} [, relrate1=@{real>0@}, relrate2=@{real>0@}]) 
or 
@item Triplet(model1=@{model description@}, model2=@{model description@}, model3=@{model description@}[, relrate1=@{real>0@}, relrate2=@{real>0@}]) 

substitution model on 3 letters words. The arguments @var{model} and
@var{model@{i@}} are for descriptions of models on single sites such as
nucleotides or proteins. The alphabet must be a 3-letters word
alphabet or a codon alphabet.

If the argument is @var{model}, the @emph{same} single site model is
used on all positions (ie the parameters are shared between all
positions).

If the arguments are @var{model1}, @var{model2}, @var{model3}, each
single site model stands for a single-site substitution model. In that
case, all single site models parameters are position dependent.

Each single site model is normalized and the substitution rates
between triplets that differ on more than one letter are null.

Arguments @var{relrate@{i@}} stands for the relative substitution rates
of the sites. Default: @var{relrate@{i@}=1/@{4-i@}}, such that the rate
of each site is 1/3.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Codon(letter=DNA)
genetic_code=Standard
model=Triplet(model=T92)
@end example
@end cartouche
builds a model on codons, such all sites follow the same T92 model.
The parameters names are @var{Triplet.123_T92.kappa},
@var{Triplet.relrate1}, @var{Triplet.relrate2}.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Word(letter=DNA, length=3)
model=Triplet(model1=T92, model2=T92, model3=JC69)
@end example
@end cartouche
builds a model on 3 bases words, such first and second sites follow
independent T92 models, and third site follows a JC69 model. Then the
parameters names are @var{Triplet.1_T92.kappa},
@var{Triplet.2_T92.kappa}, @var{Triplet.relrate1},
@var{Triplet.relrate2}.

See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1TripletSubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model word YpR_Sym}
@item  YpR_Sym(model=@{model description@}, [rCgT=@{real>=0@}, rTgC=@{real>=0@}, rCaT=@{real>=0@}, rTaC=@{real>=0@}])

substitution model on quotiented triplets to handle strand symmetric
neighbour-dependency inside dinucleotides YpR (see Bérard and Guéguen
2012). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YpR_SymSubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model word YpR_Gen}
@item  YpR_Gen(model=@{model description@}, [rCgT=@{real>=0@}, rcGA=@{real>=0@}, rTgC=@{real>=0@}, rtGA=@{real>=0@}, rCaT=@{real>=0@}, rcAG=@{real>=0@}, rTaC=@{real>=0@}, rtAG=@{real>=0@}])

substitution model on quotiented triplets to handle general symmetric
neighbour-dependency inside dinucleotides YpR (see Bérard and Guéguen
2012). See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1YpR_GenSubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@end table

@node Meta, Mixture, Multiple, Model
@subsubsection Meta models

These substitution models take as argument another substitution model, and add several parameters.
 
@table @command

@item @anchor{model meta TS98}
@item  TS98(model=@{model description@}, s1=@{real>0@}, s2=@{real>0@} [, initFreqs])
Tuffley and Steel 1998's 'covarion' model, taking a nested
substitution model as argument for @var{model}. The nested model can
be any substitution model for any alphabet. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1TS98.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model meta G01}
@item  G01(model=@{model description@}, rdist=@{rate distribution description@}, mu=@{real>0@} [, initFreqs])
Galtier 2001's 'covarion' model, taking a nested substitution model as
argument for @var{model} and a rate distribution for parameter
@var{rdist} @pxref{Discrete distributions}. The nested model can be any substitution
model for any alphabet. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1G01.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.


@item @anchor{model meta RE08}
@item  RE08(model=@{model description@}, lambda=@{real>0@}, mu=@{real>0@} [, initFreqs])
Rivas and Eddy 2008's substitution model with gaps, taking a nested
substitution model as argument for @var{model}. Parameter @var{lambda}
is the insertion rate, while @var{mu} is the deletion rate. See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1RE08.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model meta POMO}
@item POMO(model=@{model description@} [, fitness=@{values@}])
De Maio, Schrempf and Kosiol 2O15's mutation model considering
diallelic states, from a given mutation @var{model}. Following
modeling from Borges and Kosiol, optional @var{fitness} parameters can
be used to describe the fitness of the states.
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1POMO.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@end table

@node Mixture, Conditioned , Meta, Model
@subsubsection Mixture of models


Mixed models are sometimes called "site models".

Mixed models combine several substitution models with respective
probabilities and rates. We call submodels all the models that are mixed in the
mixture. A Mixed model is either the mixture of several predefined
models, or based on a "simple" model in which some parameters follow
given distributions.

During the likelihood computation process, several ways of mixing the
transition probabilities and conditional likelihoods are possible, in
the description of the processes. @xref{Scenarios}

@table @command

@item @anchor{model general MixedModel}
@item  MixedModel(model=@{model description@})
Mixture model from a given @var{model} in which some parameters follow
a probabilistic distribution, using the description of the
distribution @pxref{Discrete distributions}. Any discrete distribution
available can be used, but when the range of a parameter is limited,
the domain of the assigned distribution is truncated accordingly.

@cartouche
@example
model=MixedModel(model=TN93(kappa1=Gamma(n=4,alpha=3,beta=1),\
                            kappa2=Exponential(n=2, lambda=2),\
                            theta=0.5,theta1=0.2,theta2=0.1))
@end example
@end cartouche
has parameters @var{TN93.kappa1_Gamma.alpha},
@var{TN93.kappa1_Gamma.beta},
@var{TN93.kappa2_Exponential.lamba},
@var{TN93.theta}, @var{MixedModel.TN93.theta1},
@var{TN93.theta2}.

See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1MixtureOfASubstitutionModel.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@item @anchor{model general Mixture}
@item  Mixture(model1=@{model description@},..., modeln=@{model description@} [, relrate1=@{1>real>0@},..., relrate@{n-1@}=@{1>real>0@}, relproba1=@{1>real>0@}, ..., relproba@{n-1@}=@{1>real>0@}, initFreqs])
Mixture model built from several @var{models}: each model has its own
probability and rate. 

Arguments @var{relproba@{i@}} stands for the relative probability and
@var{relrate@{i@}} stands for the relative rate of each model (in the
order the models are given). Default: @var{relproba@{i@}=1/@{n-i+1@}},
such that the probability of each site is 1/n, and
@var{relrate@{i@}=1/@{n-i+1@}} such that the rate of each site is 1.

@cartouche
@example
model=Mixture(model1=GY94(), model2=YN98(), relrate1=0.1)
@end example
@end cartouche
has parameters@var{Mixture.relrate1}, @var{Mixture.relproba1},
@var{Mixture.1_GY94.kappa}, @var{Mixture.1_GY94.V},
@var{Mixture.2_YN98.kappa}, @var{Mixture.2_YN98.omega}.

See the
@uref{https://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/bpp-doc/bpp-phyl/classbpp_1_1MixtureOfSubstitutionModels.html#details, Bio++ description, Bio++ description}.

@end table

@node Conditioned, Register, Mixture, Model
@subsubsection Conditioned models

The transition probabilities on the branches are conditioned by the
occurrence of given events. The model is then no-markovian, but
semi-markovian. The sets of considered events follow the one (ie
register) defined for substitution mapping (see the testnh manual).

@table @command

@item @anchor{model general OneChange}
@item  OneChange(model=@{model description@})
The transition probabilities along each branch are conditioned by the
fact that there has been at least one substitution on this branch with
this model.

@item @anchor{model general OneChangeRegister}
@item  OneChange(model=@{model description@}, register=@{register
name@}, numReg=num1+num2+...)

The transition probabilities along each branch are conditioned by the
fact that there has been on this branch at least one substitution
of the specific types in the register. The "+" permits the declaration
of several types.

@end table

@node Register, , Conditioned, Model
@subsubsection Models from Registers

Given a register, the substitutions are clustered per type, and a
specific rate is associated for each type (denoted
@var{rho_typename}). Then, from a given model generator, all
substitution rates are multiplied by the specific rate of their type.
Per default, the resulting model is not normalized, but it can be with
option @option{isNormalized=true}. The sets of types follow the ones
(ie register) defined for substitution mapping (see the testnh
manual).

@table @command

@item @anchor{model general FromRegister}
@item  FromRegister(model=@{model description@}, register=@{register
name@} [, isNormalized=true])

@end table

@node  Root, FrequenciesSet, Model, Likelihoods
@subsection Setting up the root frequencies

Several root frequencies can be defined in the following way:

@table @command
@item root_freq@{int@}=@{frequency set description@}
@end table

The Frequencies set used can be any of the ones described below
@xref{Frequencies sets}, depending on the alphabet used.


@node FrequenciesSet, Rates, Root, Likelihoods
@subsection Declaring frequencies sets
@anchor{Frequencies sets}


@subsubsection General alphabets
For all alphabets, the following frequencies distributions are
available:

@table @command

@item @anchor{frequencies general Fixed}
@item  Fixed()
All frequencies are fixed to their initial value and are not
estimated. 

@item @anchor{frequencies general Full}
@item  Full(theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, ..., thetaN=@{real]0,1[@})
Full parametrization. Contains N free parameters, where N is equal to
the size of the alphabet - 1. For codon models, N is the size of the
alphabet - 1 - the number of stop codons, whose frequencies are set to
0. For nucleotide sequences, theta is the GC content, theta1 is the
proportion of A over A+T, and theta2 is the proportion of G over G+C.

@item @anchor{frequencies general Empirical}
@item  Empirical(file=@{path@} [,col=@{int@}])
Read frequencies from a file. Each frequencies is set as plain column
in the file. If several columns are in the file, the number of the
column can be given with @{col@} argument (default:  1).


@item @anchor{frequencies general Empirical+F}
@item  Empirical+F(name=@{chars@}, file=@{path@}, [theta=@{real]0,1[@}, theta1=@{real]0,1[@}, theta2=@{real]0,1[@}, ..., initFreqs])
Build a protein substitution model from a file in PAML format, and use
free equilibrium frequencies. 'name' will be used as a parameter
namespace, including for frequencies.

@end table

@sp 1

In addition, all frequencies sets accept the following arguments, that
take priority over the parameter specification:

@table @command

@item init=@{balanced,observed@} [, data=@{int@}, init.observedPseudoCount=@{integer@}]

Set all frequencies to the same value, or to their observed counts (in
which case a @var{data} argument is needed).

If the frequencies are set from observed counts, a pseudo count can be
added to all the counts.

@item values=(@{vector<double>@})
Explicitly set all frequencies manually. The size of the input vector
should equal the number of resolved states in the alphabet, be in
alphabetical order of states, and sum to 1.

@end table


@subsubsection Nucleotide alphabets

@table @command

@item @anchor{frequencies nucleotide GC}
@item  GC(theta=@{real]0,1[@})
For nucleotides only, set the G content equal to the C content.

@end table

@subsubsection Word alphabets

@table @command

@item @anchor{frequencies word Word}
@item  Word(frequency=@{frequency set description@})

or 

@item Word(frequency1=@{frequency set description@}, frequency2=@{frequency set description@}, ..., frequencyn=@{frequency set description@})

frequencies on words computed as the product of frequencies on the
letters. The arguments @var{frequency} and @var{frequency@{i@}} are
for descriptions of frequency sets on single sites such as nucleotides
or proteins. The alphabet must be a Word alphabet.

If the argument is @var{frequency}, the number of multiplied single
site frequencies is the length of the words in the alphabet, and the
@emph{same} single site frequency set is used (ie the parameters are
shared between all positions).

If the arguments are @var{frequency1}, ..., @var{frequency@{n@}}, the
length of the words in the alphabet must be @var{n}, and all single
site frequency sets are independent. In that case, all single site
frequency set parameters are position dependent.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Word(letter=DNA,length=4)
root_freq1=Word(frequency=GC())
@end example
@end cartouche
builds a root frequency set on 4 bases words, such that all sites
frequencies follow the same GC frequency set model. The parameter
name is @var{1234_GC.theta}.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Word(letter=DNA,length=4)
root_freq1=Word(frequency1=GC(),frequency2=GC(),\
                      frequency3=Fixed(),frequency4=Full())
@end example
@end cartouche
builds a root frequency set on 4 bases words, such first and second sites
follow independent GC frequency sets, third site follows a Fixed
frequency set, and fourth site follows a Full frequency set. Then the
parameters names are @var{1_GC.theta},
@var{2_GC.theta}, @var{4_Full.theta_1},
@var{4_Full.theta_2}, @var{4_Full.theta_3}.

@end table

@subsubsection Codon alphabets
@anchor{Codon frequencies}

@table @command

@item @anchor{frequencies codon Codon}
@item  Codon(frequency=@{frequency set description@})

or 

@item Codon(frequency1=@{frequency set description@}, frequency2=@{frequency set description@}, frequency3=@{frequency set description@})

frequencies on codons computed as the product of frequencies on the
letters, with stop codon frequencies set to zero. The arguments
@var{frequency} and @var{frequency@{i@}} are for descriptions of
frequency sets on nucleotides. The alphabet must be a Codon alphabet.

If the argument is @var{frequency}, the @emph{same} single site
frequency set is used (ie the parameters are shared between all
positions).

If the arguments are @var{frequency1}, @var{frequency2},
@var{frequency3}, all single site frequency sets are independent. In
that case, all single site frequency set parameters are position
dependent.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Codon(letter=DNA)
genetic_code=Standard
root_freq1=Codon(frequency=GC())
@end example
@end cartouche
builds a frequency set on codons, such that all sites frequencies
follow the same GC frequency set model. The parameter name is
@var{123_GC.theta}.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=Codon(letter=DNA)
genetic_code=Standard
root_freq1=Codon(frequency1=GC(),frequency2=GC(),\
                               frequency3=Fixed())
@end example
@end cartouche

builds a frequency set on codons, such that first and second sites
follow independent GC frequency sets, third site follows a Fixed
frequency set. Then the parameters names are @var{1_GC.theta},
@var{2_GC.theta}.

@item @anchor{frequencies codon PAML}
@item  PAML like

Predefined codon frequencies are available, with a syntax similar to
the one used in the PAML software. 

@itemize
@item F0: all frequencies are assumed to be fixed and equal to 1/61, 0 for stop codons.
@item F1X4: 4 distinct frequencies are used, with parameters theta, theta1, theta2 (@xref{Frequencies sets}, ``Full'' method).
@item F3X4: 4 distinct frequencies are used for each position, resulting in 9 parameters in total (3 independent ``Full'' frequencies set).
@item F61: free equilibrium frequencies, stop codons set to 0.
@end itemize

@end table

An optional option @var{mgmtStopCodon} can be set to define how the
frequencies computed to stop codons in the case of F1X4 et F3X4 are
distributed to other codons.

@itemize
@item uniform : each stop frequency is distributed evenly
@item linear : each stop frequency is distributed to the neighbour
codons (ie 1 substitution away), in proportion to each target codon
frequency.
@item quadratic (default): each stop frequency is distributed to the
neighbour codons (ie 1 substitution away), in proportion to the square
of each target codon frequency.
@end itemize


@node Rates, Process, FrequenciesSet, Likelihoods
@subsection Setting up substitution rates

Rate distributions are defined in the following way:
@table @command

@item rate_distribution1@{int@} = @{rate distribution description@}

@end table

The rate distribution is set to have a mean of 1.
The following distributions are currently available:

@table @command

@item @anchor{rate Constant}
@item  Constant
Uses a constant rate across sites.

@item @anchor{rate Gamma}
@item  Gamma(n=@{int>=2@}, alpha=@{float>0@})
A discretized gamma distribution of rates, with @var{n} classes, and a
given shape, with mean 1 (scale=shape).

@item @anchor{rate Invariant}
@item  Invariant(dist=@{rate distribution description@}, p=@{real[0,1]@})
A composite distribution allowing a special class of invariant site,
with a probability @var{p}.

@end table

@node  Process, Scenarios, Rates, Likelihoods
@subsection Setting up the processes


There are two kinds of processes, site substitution process and
sequence substitution processes. 

@subsubsection Site processes

Site substitution processes describe how to gather the elements
necessary to define a substitution process: model, tree, root
frequencies and rate distribution.

All these objects are referenced with their number used at their
declaration.

@table @command

@item @anchor{process Homogeneous}
@item  process@{int@} = @{Homogeneous@}(tree=@{int@}, model=@{int@}[, rate=@{int@} , root_freq=@{int@}, scenario=@{int@}])

The @command{Homogeneous} type is used for homogeneous process.

@cartouche
@example
alphabet=DNA
tree1=user(file=mytree.dnd)
model1=T92()
process1 = Homogeneous(model=1, tree=1)
@end example
@end cartouche

@item @anchor{process OnePerBranch}
@item  process@{int@} = @{OnePerBranch@}(tree=@{int@}, model@{int@}=@{int@},
                         [rate=@{int@} , root_freq=@{int@}, scenario=@{int@}, 
                         shared_parameters=@{vector of @{list<chars>@}, @{list<chars>_[list<int>]@}@}]) 

@command{OnePerBranch} type is used for setting all branch models (for
instance Galtier and Gouy 97 for branch GC content, or PAML branch
model). The model is cloned to have one
independent model per branch.

Optional argument @option{shared_parameters} is the vector of model
parameters that are shared by all branches, or by a set of branches,
defined by nodes ids between brackets.


@item @anchor{process NonHomogeneous}
@item  process@{int@} =
@{NonHomogeneous@}(tree=@{int@}, model@{int@}=@{int@},
model@{int@}.nodes_id=(@{int@},...,@{int@})[, rate=@{int@} ,
root_freq=@{int@}, scenario=@{int@}]) 


The @command{NonHomogeneous} type is used for the most general case,
including PAML clade models. Several models can be declared in the
process, using successive model index (starting with 1), and assigning
specific nodes id to each model. For example:

@cartouche
@example
process=NonHomogeneous(tree=1, model1=3, model1.nodes_id=(0:2,4,7:8), model2=5, model2.nodes_id=(3,5,6), rate=1, root_freq=2, scenario=@{int@})
@end example
@end cartouche

Key words @option{All}, @option{Leaves}, and @option{NoLeaves}
(explicit meaning) can be used for nodes id.

@end table

About the arguments to declare processes:

@table @option

@item root_freq 
If @option{root_freq} is not declared, the process is assumed
stationary. In case of non-homogeneity, the used root frequencies is
the equilibrium frequency of the first model. When this model is a
mixture model, the root frequencies are set to be the average (with
the respective probabilities of the submodels) of the equilibrium
frequencies of the submodels.

@item rate
If @option{rate} is not declared, the rate distribution is set
Constant.

When the rate is discretized in several substitution
classes, a specific class can be used as the rate of the process.

For example, here is the declaration of a stationary non-homogeneous
process in which the rate is the second discrete value of the
discretized gamma distribution.

@example
rate_distribution1 = Gamma(n=4)

process2=NonHomogeneous(model1=1,model1.nodes_id=(1:4,6:9),model2=2,model2.nodes_id=5,tree=2,rate=1.2)
@end example

@item scenario

A scenario number can be declared in the case of mixed models inside
the process. It describes how the submodels are organized along the
phylogeny. @xref{Scenario}.

In the case of mixed models, if no scenario is declared, the mixture
is made inside each branch, which means that a site can swtch between
submodels at any node. 

@end table

@subsubsection Sequence processes

Sequence substitution processes set up an organization of site
substitution processes along the sequence. 

@table @command

@item @anchor{process Mixture}
@item  process@{int@} = Mixture(process@{int@}=@{int@},...,process@{int@}=@{int@},[probas=(@{vector of process probabilities@})])

This builds a mixture of substitution processes, in the same manner as
@ref{model general Mixture}, where site substitution processes are
enumerated, and prior probabilities can be given as a vector (which
must sum one).

Each site substitution process has its own prior probability and the
likelihood on a site is the average value of the likelihoods of all
processes, given their prior probabilities.


@cartouche
@example
process2=NonHomogeneous(...)
process5=Homogeneous(...)

process7=Mixture(process1=2, process2=5, probas=(0.3,0.7))
@end example
@end cartouche


@item @anchor{process AutoCorr}
@item  process@{int@} = AutoCorr(process@{int@}=@{int@},...,process@{int@}=@{int@},[probas=(@{vector of autocorrelation probabilities@})])

Along the sequence, the site substitution processes are
autocorrelated, which makes the whole process (along sites and time)
an Hidden Markov Model, where the transition probilities from a
specific process to the other ones are equal. The likelihood on a site
is computed using the forward algorithm of HMM modelling. The within
process transition probabilities can be given as a vector.

@example           
process2=NonHomogeneous(...)
process5=Homogeneous(...)

process7=AutoCorr(process1=2, process2=5, probas=(0.95,0.9))
@end example

@item @anchor{process HMM}
@item  process@{int@} = HMM(process@{int@}=@{int@},...,process@{int@}=@{int@},[probas=(@{vector of (@{vector of process transition probabilities@})@})])

The probabilities of the processes on the sites are dependent in a
markovian way, which makes the whole process (along sites and time) an
Hidden Markov Model. The likelihood on a site is computed using the
forward algorithm of HMM modelling. The transition probabilities can
be given as a vector of lines of the transition matrix, each being
given as a vector.

@example           
process2=NonHomogeneous(...)
process5=Homogeneous(...)
process3=NonHomogeneous(...)

process7=HMM(process1=2, process2=5, process3=3, probas=((0.95,0.01,0.04),(0.1,0.8,0.1),(0.1,0.03,0.87)))
@end example

@item @anchor{process Partition}
@item  process@{int@} = Partition(process@{int@}=@{int@},process@{int@}.sites=(@{int@},...,@{int@}))

The site substitution processes are organized in a partition along the
sequence. The sites of the processes are defined as a list with
ranges.

@example           
process2=NonHomogeneous(...)
process5=Homogeneous(...)

process7=Partition(process1=2, process2=5, process1.sites=(1,5:20,24-35), process2.sites=(2-4,21:23,36-50))
@end example

@end table


@node  Scenarios, Phylo-likelihoods, Process, Likelihoods
@anchor{Scenario}
@subsection Scenarios with mixture models

In default setting of mixture models in a process, each branch has its
own mixing, with mixed transition matrices. It means that a site can
switch freely between submodels at each node of the tree. To constrain
more the organization of switches inside and between the mixture
models, we use the scenarios.

@cartouche
@example

model1=T92()
model2=MixedModel(model=T92(kappa=Simple(values=(4,10,20),probas=(0.1,0.5,0.4))))
model3=MixedModel(model=TN93(theta1=Simple(values=(0.1,0.5,0.9),probas=(0.3,0.2,0.5))))

process1=NonHomogeneous(model1=1, model1.nodes_id=0:1, model2=2, model2.nodes_id=2:3, \
                        model3=3, model3.nodes_id=4:5, tree=1, root_freq=2)

@end example
@end cartouche

In this case, on branches 2 & 3 a site follows any submodel of model 2
(independently between the branches), and on branches 4 & 5, a site
follows any submodel of model 3 (independently between the branches).
Also, there is no constraint between models 2 & 3, which means that a
site can follow any submodel of model 2 and any submodel of model 3.

@sp 1

Scenarios allow the declaration of more constrained ways to mix
submodels along a tree. A scenario will be a combination of paths, in
which the submodels are put together to describe how a site is
constrained to follow a succession of submodels along the tree.

Inside a path, the choice submodels from a mixed model is constant on
all branches where the mixed model is assigned. If model M=(Ma,Mb,Mc)
is defined on set of branches S, a site in constrained to follow
either Ma on all S, or Mb on all S, or Ms on all S (or any constant
combination of those). If we want that two branches of S are
independent, two similar mixed models must be defined.

In case of nonhomogeneous modeling, paths may that define dependencies
between submodels of different mixtures, which means that the
probabilities of the submodels are linked (see below).


@sp 1

In an Homogeneous process, a path corresponds to a same submodel on
all the branches and the probability of a path is the probability of
its submodel. Given a site follows a path, a likelihood can be
computed; and the overall likelihood on this site is the mean of these
likelihoods, given the probabilities of the paths. The probability of
a path is the (sum of the) probability of the submodels that are used
in it, as they are defined in the model. For example (see the proper
syntax below):

@cartouche
@example

model1=MixedModel(model=T92(kappa=Simple(values=(4,10,20),probas=(0.1,0.5,0.4))))

path1 = model1[1]
path2 = model1[2] & model1[3]

scenario1 = path1 & path2

process1 = Homogeneous(model=1, tree=1, scenario = 1)

@end example
@end cartouche

defines a modeling with two paths: a site either follows parameter
@var{T92.kappa=4} on all branches of the tree, or switches freely
between parameters @var{T92.kappa=10} and @var{T92.kappa=20} (with
respective probabilities 0.5/0.9 and 0.4/0.9). The likelihood is the
mean of the likelihood along path1 with probability 0.1 and of the
likelihood along path2 with probability 0.9.

@sp 1

When process definition is @option{OnePerBranch}, there are no
constraint on the paths, and each site can freely switch between
submodels at each node. Different modeling is possible, ask developers.


@sp 1

With Nonhomogeneous process, several models are applied on the tree,
some models are mixed, some are not. A path is a vector which size is
the number of mixed models. For example (see the proper syntax below):

@example

model1=MixedModel(model=T92(kappa=Simple(values=(4,10,20),probas=(0.1,0.5,0.4))))
model2=MixedModel(model=TN93(kappa=Simple(values=(1,2),probas=(0.3,0.7))))

path1 = model1[1] & model2[1]
path2 = model1[2,3] & model2[2]

scenario1 = path1 & path2

process1=NonHomogeneous(model1=1, model1.nodes_id=0:1, model2=2, \
                        model2.nodes_id=2:3, tree=1, root_freq=2, scenario = 1)

@end example

defines a modeling with two paths: a site either follows parameter
@var{T92.kappa=4} on branches 0 and 1 and parameter @var{TN93.kappa=1}
on branches 2 and 3, or follows a free switch between parameters
@var{T92.kappa=10} and @var{T92.kappa=20} on branches 0 and 1 and
parameter @var{TN93.kappa=2} on branches 2 and 3.

In this case, the probability of @var{TN93.kappa=1} in model 2 equals
the probability of @var{T92.kappa=10} in model 1, and the probability
of @var{TN93.kappa=2} in model 2 equals the sum of the probabilities
of @var{T92.kappa=10} and @var{T92.kappa=20} in model 1.

Since this constraint between probabilities may be contradictory with
the probabilities originally defined in models 1 and 2, the reference
probabilities are the ones of the first numbered mixed model, here
model 1, and the mixing probabilities of model 2 are not considered.
However, if the modeling is:

@example

model1=MixedModel(model=TN93(kappa=Simple(values=(1,2),probas=(0.3,0.7))))
model2=MixedModel(model=T92(kappa=Simple(values=(4,10,20),probas=(0.1,0.5,0.4))))

path1 = model1[1] & model2[1]
path2 = model1[2] & model2[2,3]

scenario1 = path1 & path2

process1=NonHomogeneous(model1=1, model1.nodes_id=0:1, model2=2, \
                        model2.nodes_id=2:3, tree=1, root_freq=2, scenario = 1)

@end example

the sum of the probabilities of @var{T92.kappa=10} and
@var{T92.kappa=20} in model 2 is set to the probability of
@var{TN93.kappa=2} in model 1, which means that the relative
probabilities of both submodels in model 2 are used in the path set by
@var{TN93.kappa=2}, respectively 0.7*0.5/0.9 and 0.7*0.4/0.9.


It should be noticed that during the optimization procedure, such
constraints between submodel probabilities choice may entail the
non-identifiability of several parameters (here the probabilities in
model 2), so the user should be careful about this and decide to
remove them from the optimization process.

@sp 1


@table @command

@item @anchor{path}
@item  path@{int@} = model@{int@}[@{int@}] & ... & model@{int@}[@{int@}]
@item path@{int@} = model@{int@}[@{chars@},...,@{chars@}] & ... & model@{int@}[@{chars@},...,@{chars@}]

Succession of submodels described from their numbers or descriptors in
mixed models. If inside a path a mixed model is used with several
submodel numbers, it means that the path allows the choice between the submodels.

Submodels can be described in different ways, such as numbers:

@cartouche
@example
path1 = model2[1]
path2 = model2[2,3]

@end example
@end cartouche

In case of Mixed Models (@pxref{model general MixedModel}), it is
possible to refer to the submodels through the names of the categories
of the probabilistic parameters:

@cartouche
@example
model2=MixedModel(model=T92(kappa=Simple(values=(4,10,20),probas=(0.1,0.5,0.4))))
model3=MixedModel(model=TN93(theta1=Simple(values=(0.1,0.5,0.9),probas=(0.3,0.2,0.5))))

path1=model2[T92.kappa_1] & model3[TN93.theta1_2, TN93.theta1_3]

@end example
@end cartouche


And in case of Mixture Model (@pxref{model general Mixture}), the
submodels can be accessed through the names of the models that make
the mixture:

@cartouche
@example
model1=Mixture(model1=GY94(), model2=YN98(), relrate1=0.1)
model2=Mixture(model1=MG94(), model2=YN98(), relrate1=0.1)

path = model1[GY94] & model2[YN98]
@end example
@end cartouche

It is possible to link mixtures of submodels. For example,

@example 
model2=MixedModel(model=T92(kappa=Simple(values=(4,10,20),probas=(0.1,0.5,0.4))))
model3=MixedModel(model=TN93(theta1=Simple(values=(0.1,0.5,0.9),probas=(0.3,0.2,0.5))))

path1=model2[T92.kappa_1] & model3[TN93.theta1_2] & model3[TN93.theta1_3]
@end example

means that a site that has @var{T92.kappa=4} in model2 has either
@var{TN93.theta1=0.5} or @var{TN93.theta1=0.9} in model3.

@sp 1

Also, when several parameters are mixed inside a mixed model, when
only a parameter value is used in a path, it means that all values of
the other parameter are used in this path. It is possible to restrain
this to a specific combination of parameters values using separator
``,'' inside the brackets. When ``,'' is used before a parameter name,
the intersection of the submodels in the path under construction and
the submodels linked with this parameter is used. When ``,'' is used
before a submodel number, this number is added to the computed path.
For example:

@cartouche
@example 
model1 = MixedModel(model=YN98(kappa=Simple(values=(3,4),probas=(0.1,0.9))\
        ,omega=Simple(values=(0.02,0.05),probas=(0.5,0.5)), frequencies=F0))
model2 = MixedModel(model=YN98(kappa=Simple(values=(1,2),probas=(0.1,0.9))\
        ,omega=Simple(values=(0.1,0.5),probas=(0.2,0.8))))

path1 = model1[YN98.kappa_1,YN98.omega_2,2]&model2[YN98.omega_1,YN98.kappa_2]
path2 = model1[YN98.kappa_2,YN98.omega_2,1]&model2[YN98.omega_2,1]

@end example
@end cartouche

will define two paths. In the first path, for the first model
successively the submodel numbers are 1,3 (from @var{YN98.kappa_1}),
then restricted to 3 (because submodels of @var{YN98.omega_2} are 3
and 4), and then extended to 2,3. For the second model, they are
successively 1,2, and then restristed to 2.

In the second path, for the first model successively the submodel
numbers are 2,4 (from @var{YN98.kappa_2}), then restricted to 4
(because submodels of @var{YN98.omega_2} are 3 and 4), and then
extended to 1,4. For the second model, they are successively 3,4, and
then extended to 1,3,4.

@sp 1

When the submodel is wrapped in a model name (such as YN98 in
YNGP_M2), the paths should be defined as combinations of the parameter
or the models that are mixed. For example, YNGP_M2 is made of 3 YN98
models, depending of three @var{omega} values: <1, =1, >1. If we want
a site to switch between <1 and >1 omega values between two sets of
branches:

@cartouche
@example

model1=YNGP_M2(frequencies=F1X4)
model2=YNGP_M2(frequencies=F1X4)

path1=model1[YN98.omega_1] & model2[YN98.omega_3]
path2=model1[YN98.omega_2] & model2[YN98.omega_2]
path3=model1[YN98.omega_3] & model2[YN98.omega_1]

@end example
@end cartouche

Another example in the case of mixtures of mixed models, where the
submodels are defined by their names;

@example

model1=LLG08_UL2()
model2=LLG08_UL3()

path1=model1[LLG08_UL2.M2] & model2[LLG08_UL3.Q1]
path2=model1[LLG08_UL2.M1] & model2[LLG08_UL3.Q2] & model2[LLG08_UL3.Q3]
@end example

or, if the user does not know the names of the submodels:

@example

model1=LLG08_UL2()
model2=LLG08_UL3()

path1=model1[2] & model2[1]
path2=model1[1] & model2[2, 3]
@end example

@sp 1

@item @anchor{scenario}
@item  scenario@{int@} = path@{int@} & ... & path@{int@} [& complete]
@item scenario@{int@} = split(model=@{int@})

A scenario sets together a list of predefined paths. For example:

@example

model1=MixedModel(model=T92(kappa=Simple(values=(4,10,20),probas=(0.1,0.5,0.4))))

path1 = model1[1]
path2 = model1[2]
path3 = model1[3]

scenario1 = path1 & path2 & path3

process1 = Homogeneous(model=1, tree=1, scenario = 1)

@end example


@example

model1 = MixedModel(model=YN98(kappa=Simple(values=(3,4),probas=(0.1,0.9))\
        ,omega=Simple(values=(0.02,0.05),probas=(0.5,0.5)), frequencies=F0))
model2 = MixedModel(model=YN98(kappa=Simple(values=(1,2),probas=(0.1,0.9))\
        ,omega=Simple(values=(0.1,0.5),probas=(0.2,0.8))))

path1 = model2[1]
path2 = model2[2]
path3 = model2[3]

scenario1 = path1 & path2 & path3

process1=NonHomogeneous(model1=1, model1.nodes_id=0:1, model2=2,
model2.nodes_id=2:3, model3=3, model3.nodes_id=4:5, tree=1, rate=1,
root_freq=2, scenario = 1)

@end example


In this case, since model2 is totally split, it is possible to make it
shorter:

@example

scenario1 = split(model=2)

process1=NonHomogeneous(model1=1, model1.nodes_id=0:1, model2=2,\
                model2.nodes_id=2:3, model3=3, model3.nodes_id=4:5,\
                tree=1, rate=1, root_freq=2, scenario = 1)

@end example

@sp 1

Paths can be used to make combination of submodels between several
models. For example:

@example
path1=model2[T92.kappa_1] & model3[TN93.theta1_2]
path2=model2[T92.kappa_2] & model3[TN93.theta1_3]
@end example

@sp 1

or, similar, because there is only one mixture in each model:

@example
path1=model2[1] & model3[2]
path2=model2[2] & model3[3]
@end example

@sp 1

The third path (for the remaining submodels) is automatically
computed in the scenario, with @var{complete}:

@example

model1 = MixedModel(model=YN98(kappa=Simple(values=(3,4),probas=(0.1,0.9))\
        ,omega=Simple(values=(0.02,0.05),probas=(0.5,0.5)), frequencies=F0))
model2 = MixedModel(model=YN98(kappa=Simple(values=(1,2),probas=(0.1,0.9))\
        ,omega=Simple(values=(0.1,0.5),probas=(0.2,0.8))))

path1 = model1[YN98.kappa_1] & model2[YN98.omega_2,YN98.kappa_2]
path2 = model1[YN98.kappa_2,YN98.omega_2,1]&model2[YN98.omega_2,1]
scenario1 = path1 & path2 & complete
@end example

@end table




@node Phylo-likelihoods, Linking, Scenarios, Likelihoods
@subsection Setting up phylo-likelihoods

A phylo-likelihood is an object defined by a data and substitution
process (site or sequence)

@table @command
@item phylo@{int@}=Single(data=@{int@}, process=@{int@})
@end table

with @var{number} at least one.

When several phylo-likelihoods are declared, they can be mixed in an
formula in a @command{result}, which function will be computed (and
optimized in the optimization program). For examples:

@example
result= (phylo1 + phylo2) / (phylo3 - phylo4)
result= (phylo1 + phylo2) / (phylo3 - phylo4)
result= (phylo1 + phylo2) / (phylo3 - phylo4)
@end example

Any parenthesized arithmetic formula is available, plus @command{exp} and
@command{log} functions.


If @command{result} is not given, the default result is the sum of the
values of all the phylo-likelihoods.



@node Linking,  , Phylo-likelihoods, Likelihoods
@subsection Linking parameters

It is possible to reduce the parameter space by linking parameters,
using for instance

@cartouche
@example
model=TN93(kappa1=1.0, kappa2=kappa1, theta=0.5)
@end example
@end cartouche

In that particular case the resulting model is strictly equivalent to
the HKY85 model. This syntax however allows to define a larger set of
models.

As long as their range match, parameters of several objects (models,
root frequencies, rates, etc) can be linked.

For instance:
@cartouche
@example
model1 = T92(theta=GC.theta, kappa=3)
model2 = T92(theta=0.39, kappa=T92.kappa_1)
@end example
@end cartouche

Parameters can also be linked out of objects, using their name. For example to linked branch lengths:

@cartouche
@example
BrLen3_2 = BrLen0_1
BrLen3_2 = BrLen1_1
@end example
@end cartouche

The full name of the parameters has to be used, see for example:

@cartouche
@example
model1 = T92(theta=0.4, kappa=4)
model2 = GTR(theta=0.4, a = 1.1, b=0.4, c=0.4, d=0.25, e=0.1)

GTR.theta1_2 = T92.theta1_1

@end example
@end cartouche

This option can be used to link parameters of the root frequencies:

@cartouche
@example
model1=GTR(theta1=0.7)
root_freq1=Full(init=balanced)

Full.theta1_1 = GTR.theta1_1
@end example
@end cartouche

It is also possible to set parameter values:

@cartouche
@example
model1=GTR(theta1=0.7)
root_freq1=Full(init=balanced)

Full.theta1_1 = 0.1
@end example
@end cartouche

@node Distribution, Estimation, Likelihoods, Common
@anchor{Discrete distributions}
@section Discrete distributions

Bio++ contains several probability distributions (currently only
discrete or discretized ones). These are:

@subsection Standard Distributions

@table @command

@item @anchor{distribution Constant}
@item  Constant(value=@{float@})
a Dirac distribution on @var{value}, with parameter @var{value}.

@item @anchor{distribution Beta}
@item  Beta(n=@{int>=2@}, alpha=@{float>0@}, beta=@{float>0@}) 
a discretized beta distribution, with @var{n} classes, with standard
parameters @var{alpha} and @var{beta}.

@item @anchor{distribution Gamma}
@item  Gamma(n=@{int>=2@}, alpha=@{float>0@}, beta=@{float>0@}) 
a discretized gamma distribution, with @var{n} classes, a shape
@var{alpha} and a rate @var{beta}, with parameters @var{alpha} and
@var{beta}.

@item @anchor{distribution Gaussian}
@item  Gaussian(n=@{int>=1@}, mu=@{float@}, sigma=@{float>0@}) 
a discretized gaussian distribution, with @var{n} classes, a mean
@var{mu} and a standard deviation @var{sigma}, with parameters
@var{mu} and @var{sigma}.

@item @anchor{distribution Exponential}
@item  Exponential(n=@{int>=2@}, lambda=@{float>0@})
a discretized exponential distribution, with @var{n} classes and
parameter @var{lambda}.

@item @anchor{distribution Simple}
@item  Simple(values=@{vector<double>@}, probas=@{vector<double>@} [, ranges=@{vector<parametername[min;max]>@}])
a discrete distribution with specific values (in @var{values}) and
their respective non-negative probabibilities (in @var{probas}). The
parameters are @var{V1}, @var{V2}, ..., @var{Vn} for all the values
and the relative probabibility parameters are @var{theta1},
@var{theta2}, ..., @var{thetan-1}. Optional argument @{ranges@} sets
the allowed ranges of values taken by the parameters; usage is like
@samp{ranges=(V1[0.2;0.9],V2[1.1;999])}.

@item @anchor{distribution TruncExponential}
@item  TruncExponential(n=@{int>=2@}, lambda=@{float>0@}, tp=@{float>0@})
a discretized truncated exponential distribution, with @var{n}
classes, parameter @var{lambda} and a truncation point @var{tp}. The
parameters are @var{lambda} and @var{tp}.

@item @anchor{distribution Uniform}
@item  Uniform(n=@{int>=1@}, begin=@{float>0@}, end=@{float>0@})
a uniform distribution, with @var{n} classes in interval
[@var{begin},@var{end}]. There are no parameters.

@end table

@subsection Mixture Distributions

@table @command

@item @anchor{distribution Invariant}
@item  Invariant(dist=@{distribution description@}, p=@{float>0@})

a Mixture of a given discrete distributution and a 0 Dirac. @var{p} is
the probability of this 0 Dirac.

For example :
@cartouche
@example
Invariant(dist=Gaussian(n=4,2,0.5),p=0.1)
@end example
@end cartouche
builds a mixture of a gaussian distribution with 4 categories (and
probability 0.9) and a 0 Dirac with probability 0.1. Overall, there
are 5 categories. The parameters names are
@var{Invariant.Gaussian.mu}, @var{Invariant.Gaussian.sigma},
@var{Invariant.p}.

@item @anchor{distribution Mixture}
@item  Mixture(probas=@{vector<double>@}, dist1=@{distribution description@}, ..., distn=@{distribution description@}) 

a Mixture of discrete distributions with specific probabilities (in
@var{probas}) and their respective desccriptions (in @var{probas}).
The parameters are the relative probabibility parameters @var{theta1},
@var{theta2}, ..., @var{thetan-1}, and the parameters of the included
distributions prefixed by @var{Mixture.i_} where @var{i} is the order
of the distribution.

For example:
@cartouche
@example
Mixture(probas=(0.3,0.7),dist1=Beta(n=5,alpha=2,beta=3),\
                       dist2=Gamma(n=10,alpha=9,beta=2)) 
@end example
@end cartouche
builds a mixture of a discrete beta distribution and of a discrete
gamma distribution, with a total of 15 classes. The parameters names
are @var{Mixture.theta1}, @var{Mixture.1_Beta.alpha},
@var{Mixture.1_Beta.beta}, @var{Mixture.2_Gamma.alpha} and
@var{Mixture.2_Gamma.beta}.

@end table


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Estimation, WritingSequences, Distribution, Common
@section Numerical parameters estimation

Some programs allow you to (re-)estimate numerical parameters, including
@itemize @bullet
@item
Branch lengths

@item
Entries of the substitution matrices

@item
Parameters of the rate distribution (currently shape parameter of the gamma law, proportion of invariant sites).

@item
Root frequencies

@end itemize

@table @command


@item optimization = @{method@}
where ``method'' can be one of

@table @command
@item None
No optimization is performed, initial values are kept ``as is''.

@item FullD(derivatives=@{Newton|Gradient@})
Full-derivatives method. Branch length derivatives are computed
analytically, others numerically. The @var{derivatives} arguments
specifies if first or second order derivatives should be used. In the
first case, the optimization method used is the so-called conjugate
gradient method, otherwise the Newton-Raphson method will be used.

@item D-Brent(derivatives=@{Newton|Gradient@}, nstep=@{int>0@})
Branch lengths parameters are optimized using either the conjugate
gradient or the Newton-Raphson method, other parameters are estimated
using the Brent method in one dimension. The algorithm then loops over
all parameters until convergence. The @var{nstep} arguments allow to
specify a number of progressive steps to perform during optimization.
If @option{nstep=3} and @option{precision=E-6}, a first optimization
with @option{precision=E-2}, will be performed, then a round with
@option{precision} set to E-4 and finally @option{precision} will be
set to E-6. This approach generally increases convergence time.

@item D-BFGS(derivatives=@{Newton|Gradient@}, nstep=@{int>0@})
Branch lengths parameters are optimized using either the conjugate
gradient or the Newton-Raphson method, other parameters are estimated
using the BFGS method. The algorithm then loops over all parameters
until convergence. The @var{nstep} arguments allow to specify a number
of progressive steps to perform during optimization. If
@option{nstep=3} and @option{precision=E-6}, a first optimization with
@option{precision=E-2}, will be performed, then a round with
@option{precision} set to E-4 and finally @option{precision} will be
set to E-6. This approach generally increases convergence time.
@end table

@c @item optimization.reparametrization = @{boolean@}
@c Tells if parameters should be transformed in order to remove constraints
@c (for instance positivie-only parameters will be log transformed in order to obtain
@c  parameters defined from -inf to +inf).
@c This may improve the optimization, particularly for parameter-rich models,
@c but the likelihood calculations will take a bit more time.

@c @item optimization.final = @{powell|simplex@}
@c Optional final optimization step, useful if numerical derivatives are to be used.
@c Leave the field empty in order to skip this step.

@item optimization.profiler = @{@{path@}|std|none@}
A file where to dump optimization steps (a file path or std for
standard output or none for no output).

@item optimization.backup.file = @{path@}
A backup file where parameters values are stored during optimization
process. If this file exists when starting the optimization, parameter
values will be set from the ones in this file. When optimization is
finished, this file is renamed with suffixe ".def".

@item optimization.message_handler = @{@{path@}|std|none@}
A file where to dump warning messages.

@item optimization.max_number_f_eval = @{int>0@}
The maximum number of likelihood evaluations to perform.

@item optimization.ignore_parameter = @{list<chars>@}
A list of parameters to ignore during the estimation process. The
parameter name should include there "namespace", that is their model
name, for instance K80.kappa, TN93.theta, GTR.a, Gamma.alpha, etc. For
nested models, the syntax is the following:
@command{G01.rdist_Gamma.alpha_1}, @command{TS98.model_T92.kappa_2},
@command{RE08.lamba_1}, @command{RE08.model_G01.model_GTR.a_1}, etc.

@sp 1

'Ancient' will ignore all parameters in the ancestral frequency set
(non-homogeneous models), 'BrLen' will ignore all branch lengths and
'Model' will ignore all model parameters.

The '*' wildcard can be used, as in @command{*theta*} for all the
parameters whose name has @command{theta} in it.


@item optimization.constrain_parameter = @{list<chars=interval>@}
A list of parameters on which the authorized values are limited to a
given interval. 

@cartouche
@example
optimization.constrain_parameter = YN98.omega = [-inf;1.9[,\
                       *theta* = [0.1;0.7[, BrLen*=[0.01;inf]
@end example
@end cartouche 

@item optimization.tolerance = @{float>0@}
The precision on the log-likelihood to reach.

@item output.infos = @{@{path@}|none@}
A text file containing several statistics for each site in the
alignment.
These statistics include the posterior rate, rate class with maximum posterior probability and whether the site is conserved or not.


@end table

The resulting tree will be written to a file specified by the general tree writing options (@ref{WritingTrees}).

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node WritingSequences, WritingTrees, Estimation, Common
@section Writing sequences/alignments to files

@table @command

@item output.sequence.file = @{path@}
The output file where to write the sequences. In cases where several
sequences are produced, the file names will be suffixed by ``_@{num@}''.

@item output.sequence.format = @{sequence format description@}
The output file format, using the same syntax as for reading (@pxref{Sequences}).
Only formats Fasta, Mase and Phylip are supported for writing.

In addition, most of the formats support the @command{length}
argument, that specifies the maximum number of sequence characters to
output on each line (default set to 100).


@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node WritingTrees,  , WritingSequences, Common
@section Writing trees to files

@table @command
@item output.tree.file = @{path@}
The phylogenetic tree file to write to. In cases where several trees
are produced, the file names will be suffixed by ``_@{num@}''.


@item output.tree.format = @{Newick|Nexus|NHX@}
The format of the output tree file.

@end table

Some programs may require that you write multiple trees to a file.
The corresponding options are then:

@table @command
@item output.trees.file = @{path@}
The file that will contain multiple trees.

@item output.trees.format = @{Newick|Nexus|NHX@}
The format of the output tree file.

@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node Reference,  , Common, Top
@chapter Bio++ Program Suite Reference

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This section now details the specific options for each program in the Bio++ Program suite.

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@menu
* bppml::                       Bio++ Maximum Likelihood.
* bppseqgen::                   Bio++ Sequence Generator.
* bppancestor::                 Bio++ Ancestral Sequences and Rates reconstruction.
* bppmixedlikelihoods::         Bio++ Site-Likelihoods Inside Mixed Models.
* bppbranchlik::                Bio++ Likelihood on branches.
* bppdist::                     Bio++ Distance Methods.
* bpppars::                     Bio++ Maximum Parsimony.
* bppconsense::                 Bio++ Consensus Trees.
* bppreroot::                   Bio++ Serial Tree Re-rooting.
* bppseqman::                   Bio++ Sequences Manipulation.
* bppalnscore::                 Bio++ Alignment Scoring.
* bpppopstats::                 Bio++ Population Genetics Statistics.
* bpptreedraw::                 Bio++ Tree Drawing.
@end menu

@node bppml, bppseqgen, Reference, Reference
@section BppML: Bio++ Maximum Likelihood

The BppML program uses the common syntax introduced in the previous
section for setting the alphabet, loading the sequences
(@pxref{Sequences}), specifying the process (@pxref{Process}), and
estimating parameters (@pxref{Estimation}).

The BppML program allows you to optimize process parameters.

@subsection Branch lengths initial values

@table @command

@item init.brlen.method = @{method description@}
Set how to initialize the branch lengths of all trees.
Available methods include:

@item Input(midpoint_root_branch=@{boolean@})
Keep initial branch lengths as is. Additional argument specifies if the root position should be moved to the midpoint position of the branch containing it. 

@item Equal(value=@{float>0@})
Set all branch lengths to the same value, provided as argument.

@item Clock
Coerce to a clock tree.

@item Grafen(height=@{@{real>0@}|input@}, rho = @{real>0@})
Uses Grafen's method to compute branch lengths.
In Grafen's method, each node is given a weight equal to the number of underlying leaves.
The length of each branch is then computed as the difference of the weights of the connected nodes, and further divided by the number of leaves in the tree.
The height of all nodes are then raised to the power of 'rho', a user specified value.
The tree is finally scaled to match a given total height, which can be the original one (@option{height=input}), or fixed to a certain value (usually @option{height=1}).
A value of rho=0 provides a star tree, and the greater the value of rho, the more recent the inner nodes. 

@item input.tree.check_root = @{boolean@}
Tell if the input tree should be checked regarding to the presence of a root. If set to yes (the default), rooted trees will be unrooted if a homogeneous model is used.
If not, a rooted tree will be fitted, which can lead to optimization issues in most cases. Use the non default option with care!
@end table


@subsection Molecular clock

BppML can also optimize branch lengths with a molecular clock:

@table @command

@item optimization.clock=@{no|global@}
Tell if a molecular clock should be assumed.

@end table


@subsection Output results

@table @command

@item output.infos = @{@{path@}|none@}
Alignment information log file (site specific rates, etc):

@item output.estimates = @{@{path@}|none@}
Write parameter estimated values.

@item output.estimates.alias = @{boolean@}
Write the alias names of the aliased parameters instead of their
values (default: true).

@end table


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node bppseqgen, bppancestor, bppml, Reference
@section BppSeqGen: Bio++ Sequence Simulator

The BppSeqGen program uses the common syntax introduced in the
previous section for setting the alphabet, loading the sequences
(@pxref{Sequences}), trees (@pxref{Tree}), root frequencies
(@pxref{FrequenciesSet}), substitution rates (@pxref{Distribution}),
models (@pxref{Model}) and writing sequence data
(@pxref{WritingSequences}).

Several simulations are possible at the same time and they are based
on site substitution processes or sequence substitution processes
@pxref{Process}, or phylolikelihoods for posterior simulations
@pxref{Phylo-likelihoods}.

The root sequence can be a given sequence, or info from a specific
file. If no specific root information is given, the root sequences are
sampled given the root description in the process/phylo used.

The basic declaration is :

@table @command
@item simul@{int@}=@{Simulation type@}(process=@{int@}, number_of_sites = @{int>0@}, ...)

to simulate following a process, with a given number of sites.

@item simul@{int@}=@{Simulation type@}(phylo=@{int@}, ...)

to simulate following the posterior process (ie described in
phylolikelihoods @command{phylo}) all along the alignment used in this
phylolikelihood.

@item simul@{int@}=@{Simulation type@}(phylo=@{int@}, pos=@{int@}, ...)

to simulate following the posterior process (ie described in
phylolikelihoods @command{phylo}) at position @command{pos}.

@end table

@sp 1

Up to now, simulation type does not matter, and only @command{simul}
is used.

Output sequence is set through compulsory argument
@var{output.sequence.file=@{file path@}}, and there are other options
for output:

@table @command
@item output.sequence.format=@{alignment format@}
Format of the output alignment (default Fasta)

@item output.internal.sequences = @{boolean@}
Tells if internal sequences should be written (default False).

@end table

@sp 1

Also, there are several options for simulations:

@table @command

@item data=@{int@}
The root sequence is built from a sequence in a given alignment
previously defined @pxref{Sequences}. The root sequence is randomly
chosen among sequences in the alignment.

@item input.infos = @{path@}
A info file like the one output by bppML. In this case, additional
options are possible:

@table @command

@item input.infos.rates = @{string@}
Name of the column on which the rates are described (default: pr).

@item input.infos.states = @{string@}
Name of the column on which the states are read (default: none, which
means a random sequence).

@end table

With both data, sites can be selected with option
@var{input.site.selection = @{string@}} from the given sequence
(@pxref{Sequences}).

@end table

@c Addition optional arguments include:

@c @table @command

@c @item input.tree.scale = @{float@}
@c An optional scaling factor for the branch length (default to 1.0)

@c @item input.tree.method = @{single|MS|CoaSim@}
@c Format of input tree(s). By default, a single tree is expected
@c ('single'). Ancestral recombination graphs (ARGs), in the form of
@c multiple trees, can also be provided in the MS or CoaSim format. Note
@c that in the case of MS, ARG are given for a certain number of sites,
@c which should be provided as additional argument (e.g.
@c @command{MS(number_of_sites=100)}). The ARG will be unscaled according
@c to the given size, and rescaled according to the given number of sites
@c to simulate. ARG in CoaSim format are already in relative scale.

@c @end table

In addition, command line argument @option{--seed=@{int>0@}} can be
used to set the seed of the random generator.


 
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node bppancestor, bppmixedlikelihoods, bppseqgen, Reference
@section BppAncestor: Bio++ Ancestral Sequence and Rate Reconstruction

The BppAncestor program uses the common syntax introduced in the
previous section for setting the alphabet, loading the sequences
(@pxref{Sequences}) and tree (@pxref{Tree}), specifying the process
(@pxref{Process}) and writing sequence data
(@pxref{WritingSequences}).

Specific options are:
@table @command

@c @item asr.method = @{none|marginal@}
@c Marginal is the only option for now. If set to "none", only nodes frequencies can be output.

@item output.sites.file = @{@{path@}|none@}
Alignment information log file (site specific rates, probabilities, etc).

@item output.sites.probabilities = @{boolean@}
Tells if we should output the site specific probabilities in each case.
@item asr.probabilities = @{boolean@}
Tells if we should output the site specific probabilities in each case
(on the way to deprecation).

@item output.nodes.file = @{@{path@}|none@}
Ancestral nodes information: @c expected frequencies (prefix exp) (see Galtier & Gouy 1998) and 
a posteriori probabilities of ancestral states (prefix eb).

@item output.nodes.add_extant = @{boolean@}
Tell if leaf nodes should be added to the output file.



@item asr.sequence.file = @{path@}
The output file where to write the sequences (has priority on
@option{output.sequence.file} option).

@item asr.sequence.format = @{sequence format description@}
The output file format, using the same syntax as for reading
(@pxref{Sequences}). Only formats Fasta, Mase and Phylip are supported
for writing. In addition, most of the formats support the
@command{length} argument, that specifies the maximum number of
sequence characters to output on each line (default set to 100) (has
priority on @option{output.sequence.format} option).

@item asr.sample = @{boolean@}
Tell if we should sample from the posterior distribution instead of using the maximum probability.

@item asr.sample.number = 10 [[asr.sample=yes]]
Number of sample sequences to output.

@item asr.add_extant = @{boolean@}
Should extant (observed) sequences be added to the output sequence
file? The sequences added are the ones which are used for the actual
calculation. It they contained gaps for instance, and that these have
been replaced by the unknown character (N or X for example), then the
sequence with unknown characters will be used.

@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node bppmixedlikelihoods, bppbranchlik, bppancestor, Reference
@section BppMixedLikelihoods: Bio++ Site-Likelihoods Inside Mixed Models.

The BppMixedLikelihoods program uses the common syntax introduced in
the previous section for setting the alphabet, loading the sequences
(@pxref{Sequences}) and tree (@pxref{Tree}) and specifying the process
(@pxref{Process}).

Given a mixed parameter name of mixed model, or a mixed model made of
several models, the BppMixedLikelihoods program computes site per site
log-likelihoods of the several values of the parameter, or of the
several sub-models of the mixture. If the mixed model is built on a
parameter which value follows a distribution, and in an additional
column -- named "mean" -- the a posteriori mean value of the parameter
is computed.

Specific options are:
@table @command

@item output.likelihoods.file = @{@{path@}@}
Output file of the program (site specific log-likelihood, and mean of
the mixed parameters, if any).

@item likelihoods.model_number = @{integer@}
In case of a non-homogeneous modeling, the number of the mixed model
which parameter or sub-models are considered.

@item likelihoods.parameter_name = @{string@}
If the considered mixed model is built from a distribution on a
parameter, the name of the parameter to be considered. In this case,
an additional column is written, in which the average a posteriori
value of the parameter is.

@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node bppbranchlik, bppdist, bppmixedlikelihoods, Reference
@section BppBranchLik: Bio++ Branch-Likelihoods of alternative models
inside a process

The BppBranchLik program uses the common syntax introduced in
the previous section for setting the alphabet, loading the sequences
(@pxref{Sequences}) and tree (@pxref{Tree}) and specifying the process
(@pxref{Process}).

Given a phylo-likelihood computed on a process or a set of processes
in a Partition, the model(s) of another process -- aka the alternative
process -- are applied on all branches the one after the other, and
(site-)likelihoods are computed given this change. The alternative
process is described as normal, the keyword @option{alt_process} is
used to give the number of the alternative process.

Specific options are:
@table @command

@item output.lik = PerBranchPerSite|PerBranch(file=@{@{path@}@})
Output file of the program, either per branch-site or per branch.

@item alt_process = @{integer@}
Number of the alternative process. Only single process or partition
processes are accepted.

@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@node bppdist, bpppars, bppmixedlikelihoods, Reference
@section BppDist: Bio++ Distance Methods
 
The BppDist program uses the common syntax introduced in the previous
section for setting the alphabet, loading the sequences
(@pxref{Sequences}) and tree (@pxref{Tree}) and specifying the process
(@pxref{Process}).

Specific options are:
@table @command

@item output.matrix.file = @{@{path@}|none@}
Where to write the matrix file (only philip format supported for now).

@item method = @{wpgma|upgma|nj|bionj@}
The algorithm to use to build the tree.

@item optimization.method = @{init|pairwise|iterations@}
There are several ways to optimize substitution parameters.
The @option{init} option corresponds to the standard behavior, that is, keeping them to their initial, user-provided value.
The @option{pairwise} option estimate those parameters in a pairwise manner.
This should be avoided, particularly with parameter-rich models.
Finally the @option{iterations} option corresponds to Ninio et al, Bioinformatics (2007) recursive algorithm:
After each distance tree, a global ML estimation of the substitution parameters is performed.
The estimated values are then used to rebuild a distance matrix and a tree.
The algorithm stops when the topology does not change anymore.
The ML optimization uses the parameters described in (@pxref{Estimation}).

@item output.tree.file = @{@{path@}|none@}
The final tree, possibly with bootstrap values:
BppDist uses the same options for bootstrap analysis than the BppML program (@pxref{bppml}).
@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node bpppars, bppconsense, bppdist, Reference
@section BppPars: Bio++ Maximum Parsimony
 
The BppPars program is currently quite limited and should not be used for serious phylogenetic analysis.
It can compute parsimony scores and perform topology estimation using the same algorithm of BppML.
It uses the common syntax introduced in the previous section for setting the alphabet, loading the sequences (@pxref{Sequences}) and tree (@pxref{Tree})).

Specific options are:
@table @command

@item optimization.topology = @{boolean@}
Tell if topology has to be estimated.

@item output.tree.file = @{@{path@}|none@}
Where to print the output file.

@item bootstrap.number = @{int>0@}
Number of bootstrap replicates to perform.

@item bootstrap.output.file = @{@{path@}|none@}
Where to write bootstrap trees.

@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node bppconsense, bppreroot, bpppars, Reference
@section BppConsense: Bio++ Consensus Trees

Probably one of the simplest program to use in the suite, just takes a list of trees (for instance produced by BppML, BppDist or BppPars with the bootstrap option enabled) and compute bootstrap values for a reference tree, provided as input, or constructed using a consensus method.
The program uses the multiple-trees reading options for input (@pxref{Tree}) and single-tree writing options for output.

@table @command

@item tree = @{tree methods@}
The method to use for getting the reference tree.
Available function are:

@table @command

@item Input
The tree is loaded using the single-tree reading options (@pxref{Tree}). 

@item Consensus(threshold = @{int[0,1]@})
Build a consensus tree according to a given threshold.
0 will output a fully resolved tree, 0.5 corresponds to the majority rule and 1 to the strict consensus, but any intermediate value can be specified.

@end table

@item bootstrap.format = @{int@}
format of the bootstrap values. If positive, output values as percentages with the specified number of decimals. If negative, output the raw counts (number of trees).
@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node bppreroot, bppseqman, bppconsense, Reference
@section BppReroot: Bio++ Serial Tree Re-rooting
 
@table @command

@item input.trees.file=@{path@}
A path toward multi-trees file (newick).

@item outgroups.file=@{path@}
A path toward a file containing the different levels of outgroups.

@item print.option=@{boolean@}
If set to true, the unrootable trees are printed as unrooted in the output file, otherwise the unrootable trees are not printed.
  
@item tryAgain.option=@{boolean@}
If set to true and ReRoot finds a non-monophyletic outgroup, it tries the next outgroup.
Otherwise, if ReRoot finds a non-monophyletic outgroup, the analysis for this tree is interrupted.
No more outgroup are analysed.

@item output.trees.file=@{path@}
File where to write the rerooted trees.

@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node bppseqman, bppalnscore, bppreroot, Reference
@section BppSeqMan: Bio++ Sequence Manipulation

The Bio++ Sequence Manipulator convert between various file formats, and can also perform various operations on sequences.
It uses the common options for setting the alphabet, loading the sequences (@pxref{Sequences}) and writing the resulting data set (@pxref{WritingSequences}).
It can use the ``Generic'' option for alphabets if only file format conversion is to be performed, but the correct alphabet must be specified for more advanced manipulations, like in silico molecular biology.

BppSeqMan can perform any number of elementary operation, in any order, providing the output of operation n is compatible with input of operation n+1, and that the input of operation 1 is compatible with the input data.

Specific options:
@table @command

@item input.alignment = @{boolean@}
Are the input sequence aligned? If so site selection and filtering is enabled and can be used to preprocess the input data.

@item sequence.manip = @{list<string>@}
The list, in appropriate order, of elementary operations to perform.
See below for a list of these operations.
@end table

@table @option
@item Complement [[alphabet = DNA or RNA]]
Convert to the complementary sequence, keeping the original alphabet.

@item Transcript [[alphabet = DNA or RNA]]
Convert to the complementary sequence, switching the type of alphabet (DNA<->RNA).

@item Switch [[alphabet = DNA or RNA]]
Change the alphabet type (DNA<->RNA).

@item Translate [[alphabet = DNA or RNA]]
Convert to proteins.
The genetic code used for translation is set via the genetic_code option.
Genetic code is set once for all sequences.

@item Invert
Invert the sequence 5' <-> 3' or N <-> C

@item RemoveGaps
Remove all gaps in sequences (ie, 'unalign').

@item GapToUnknown
Change gaps to fully unresolved characters, N for nucleotides and X for proteins.

@item UnknownToGap
Change (partially) unresolved characters to gaps.

@item RemoveStops
Remove all stop codons in sequences. If sequences are aligned, stop codons will be replaced by gaps.
The genetic code used for translation is set via the genetic_code option.
Genetic code is set once for all sequences.

@item RemoveEmptySequences
Remove all empty sequences (ie sequences with only gaps).

@item RemoveColumnsWithStop
Remove all sites with at least one stop codon.
The genetic code used for translation is set via the genetic_code option.
Genetic code is set once for all sequences.

@item GetCDS
Remove the first stop codon and everything after in codon sequences.

@item CoerceToAlignment
Try to convert a set of sequence to an alignment. This will fail if sequences do not have the same length.
This step is required before trying commands 'ResolveDotted' or 'KeepComplete'.

@item ResolveDotted(alphabet=@{RNA|DNA|Proteins@}) [[Aligned sequences]]
Convert a human-readable alignment to a machine-readable alignment.
This manipulation must be first if it is used, and the data must be load with the @option{Generic} alphabet.
@option{alphabet}: The alphabet to use in order to resolve a dotted alignment.

@item KeepComplete(maxGapAllowed=@{int>0@} or @{float[0,100]@}+%) [[Aligned sequences]]
Keep only complete sites, ie sites without any gap. Sites with unresolved characters are not removed.
It is also possible to fix a maximum proportion of gaps, see specific options.
@option{maxGapAllowed}: The maximum proportion of gaps allowed.

@item GetCodonPosition(position=@{1|2|3@})
Retrieve the given positions from codon sequences (aligned or not).

@item FilterFromTree(tree.file=@{path@}, tree.format=@{chars@})
Get a subset of sequences based on a tree file. The order of sequences in the file will reflect the tree structure. All sequences which do not have a corresponding leaf in the tree, based on the sequence name, will be removed.
This method can therefore be used for subsetting a list of sequences, and/or rearrange them in a more convenient manner.

@end table

Examples of use:

@itemize @bullet

@item Just change file format:
@cartouche
@example
sequence.manip=
input.sequence.sites_to_use = all
@end example
@end cartouche

@item Change DNA to RNA:
@cartouche
@example
sequence.manip=Switch
input.sequence.sites_to_use = all
@end example
@end cartouche

@item Unalign sequences, perform transcription and translate to proteins:
@cartouche
@example
sequence.manip=RemoveGaps,Transcript,Translate
input.sequence.sites_to_use = all
@end example
@end cartouche

@item Change all unresolved characters to gaps and keep only positions with less than 5 gaps:
@cartouche
@example
sequence.manip=UnknownToGap,KeepComplete(maxGapAllowed=5)
input.sequence.sites_to_use = all
@end example
@end cartouche

@item Keep only positions with less than 30% of gaps, and change them to unresolved characters:
@cartouche
@example
sequence.manip=KeepComplete(maxGapAllowed=30%),GapToUnknown
input.sequence.sites_to_use = all
@end example
@end cartouche

@end itemize

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node bppalnscore, bpppopstats, bppseqman, Reference
@section BppAlnScore: Bio++ Alignment Scoring

This program compares two alignments and computes column scores.
Scores are output to a text file, and/or can be used to generate
a site selection, to be output in a mase file.

The two input alignments are specified using the input.sequences
procedures (@pxref{Sequences}), with suffixes ``.test'' for the
first one, and ``.ref'' for the second. Scores will be computed 
for each column of the ``.test'' alignment.

Two scores are computed, following work by Thompson (1999):
@table @emph
@item column score (CS)
is 1 if the column is found in the reference alignment, 0 otherwise.
@item sum-of-pairs score (SPS)
is the proportion of pairs of residues which are also aligned in
the reference alignment.
@end table

Specific options:
@table @command

@item input.alignment = @{bool@}
Tell whether to read an alignment. This enables alignment-specific format (e.g. Clustal, Phylip) and alignment specific option (e.g. Mase(siteSelection=...).
By default, sequences are not considered to be aligned.

@item output.scores = @{path@}
A text file where scores can be written, one row per column.
If set to 'none', no file will be produced.

@item output.mase = @{path@}
If not 'none', a Mase alignment will be generated, as a copy
of the ``.test'' input alignment, with two sites selections
names CS and SPS.

@item output.sps_thresholds = @{float@}
The threshold to use for generating the site selection based 
on SPS score. All positions with at least the threshold value
will be included in the selection.

@item score.word_size = @{int>0@}
If alignment is for a word alphabet (typically codons), the word
size can be specified in order to produce a compatible site selection.
Please note that in this case, the alignment must not be loaded with
the world alphabet, but the corresponding letter alphabet.

@item score.phase = @{int>0|chars@}
Eather a number (1-based) stating the starting position for words,
or the starting word. In this latter case, the first occurrence of the
word in all sequences will be used to determine the phase.

@end table


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node bpppopstats, bpptreedraw, bppalnscore, Reference
@section BppPopStats: Bio++ Population Genetics Statistics

The @command{BppPopStats} program computes population genetics statistics from a sequence input alignment.
It can compute glabal alignment statistics, as well as site-specific statistics. In the first case, results
are output on screen or in a log file. In the second case, results are written in a table file, with one site per line.
Statistics available also depend on the type on input data (coding or non-coding).

@command{BppPopStats} recognizes the standard options for alphabet and genetic code, in case a codon alphabet was specified.
Sequences will be considered as coding if encoded with a codon alphabet, and non-coding otherwise.

@subsection Specific options

@table @command

@item input.sequence.file.ingroup = @{path@}
Path toward the file containing the ingroup sequences.

@item input.sequence.format.ingroup = @{string@}
Alignment input format, following standard options.

@item input.sequence.file.outgroup = @{path@}
Path toward the file containing the outgroup sequences.

@item input.sequence.format.outgroup = @{string@}
Alignment input format, following standard options.

@item input.sequence.file = @{path@}
Path toward the file containing all sequences.
This option is only recognized if @command{input.sequence.file.ingroup} was not specified.

@item input.sequence.format = @{string@}
Alignment input format, following standard options.

@item input.sequence.outgroup.index = @{[int>0]@}
Vector of positions indicating the positions of the outgroup sequences in the alignment.
This option is only recognized if @command{input.sequence.file.ingroup} was not specified.

@item input.sequence.outgroup.name = @{[string]@}
Vector of sequence names indicating the positions of the outgroup sequences in the alignment.
This option is only recognized if @command{input.sequence.file.ingroup} was not specified.

@item input.sequence.stop_codons_policy = Keep|RemoveIfLast|RemoveAll
Tells what to do with positions containing at least one stop codon: keep them, remove them only if they are at the end of the alignment, or remove them all.

@item estimate.kappa = @{[boolean]@}
Tells if the ratio of transitions / transversion should be estimated from the data and used for further analyses. If yes, kappa will be estimated by maximum likelihood using a model of (codon) sequence evolution.

@item estimate.ancestor = @{[boolean]@}
If an outgroup sequence is present, it will be used to estimate the ancestral allele for each polymorphic position.
A model of (codon) sequence evolution will be used with a marginal ancestral state reconstruction method.

@item estimate.sample_ingroup = @{[bollean]@}
Tell if a random subset of ingroup sequences should be used to fit model (speeds up calculations in case of large data sets).

@item estimate.sample_ingroup.size = @{[integer]@}
Number of ingroup sequences to sample.

@item pop.stats = @{[string]@}
The list of statistics to compute. The next section describes all available statistics.

@item logfile = @{path@}
Optional file where to output results.

@end table

@subsection Available statistics

@table @command

@item SiteFrequencies
Output the number of segregating sites as well as the number of singletons.
 
@item Watterson75
Compute Watterson's nucleotide diversity estimator (theta, averaged per site).

@item Tajima83
Compute Tajima's nucleotide diversity estimator (pi, averaged per site).

@item TajimaD
Compute Tajima's D. If a codon alignment is specified (and alphabet is set to codon type),
the @command{positions} argument further allows to compute Tajima's D on synonymous sites only
(@command{positions=synonymous}), or non-synonymous sites (@command{positions=non-synonymous}).
Default is to use all sites (@command{positions=all}).

@item FuAndLiDStar | FuAndLiFStar
Compute Fu and Li's (1993) D and F statistics. If argument @command{tot_mut} is set to yes,
then the total number of mutations is used in the calculation, instead of the number of segregating sites (default).
The @command{positions} argument further allows to compute Fu and Li's statistics on synonymous sites only
(@command{positions=synonymous}), or non-synonymous sites (@command{positions=non-synonymous}).
Default is to use all sites (@command{positions=all}).


@item PiN_PiS
For codon sequences only, obviously. Compute nucleotide diversity at synonymous and non-synonymous site,
the number of synonymous and non-synonymous sites, as well as the weighted ratio (PiN / NbN) / (PiS / NbS). 

@item dN_dS
For codon sequences only. Build the consensus sequence of both ingroup and outgroup alignments and fit a Yang and Nielsen model of codon sequence evolution with a maximum likelihood approach.
Reports the estimated parameters omega (dN / dS ratio) and kappa (transitions / transversions ratio), as well as the divergence between the two sequences. 

@item MKT
Compute the MacDonald-Kreitman table, for codon sequences with outgroup.

@item CodonSiteStatistics
Generate a table with codon-site specifics statistics, including:

@itemize @bullet

@item Whether the site is complete or not

@item Number of distinct states

@item Minor allele frequency

@item Major allele frequency

@item Minor allele

@item Major allele

@item State in the first outgroup sequence, if any

@item Ancestral state, if computed

@item Mean number of synonymous positions for polymorphism

@item Whether the site is synonymous polymorphic

@item Whether the site is four-fold degenerated

@item Non-synonymous diversity (piN)

@item Synonymous diversity (piS)

@item Mean number of synonymous positions for divergence

@item dN, if an outgroup is available

@item dS, if an outgroup is available

@end itemize

The @command{output.file} argument allows to specify the output file (mandatory).

@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@node bpptreedraw,  , bpppopstats, Reference
@section BppTreeDraw: Bio++ Tree Drawing

This is a simple program that outputs a tree in various vector formats.
It takes as input a tree following the standard syntax.

Specific options:
@table @command

@item output.drawing.file = @{path@}
The file where to output the figure.

@item output.drawing.format = @{Svg|Xfig|Inkscape|Pgf@}
The file format.
@item output.drawing.plot = @{plotting algorithm@}
The plotting algorithm can be either Phylogram or Cladogram.
They follow the keyval syntax, with the following arguments:
@end table

@table @option
@item xu, yu @{float@}
The scale units for x and y axis.

@item direction.h @{left2right|right2left@}
Horizontal orientation of the tree plot.

@item direction.v @{top2bottom|bottom2top@}
Vertical orientation of the tree plot.

@item draw.leaves, draw.ids, draw.brlen, draw.bs @{boolean@}
Tell if leaf names, node ids, branch lengths and/or bootstrap should be drawn.

@end table

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c end of document

@c @node Index,  , Reference, Top
@c @unnumbered Index
@c
@c @printindex cp

@bye
